===== Overview_of_3GPP_Release_14_Enhanced_NB-IoT-1..txt =====
MASSIVE MACHINE TYPE COMMUNICATIONS

Overview of 3GPP Release 14 Enhanced NB-loT

Andreas Hoglund, Xinggin Lin, Olof Liberg, Ali Behravan, Emre A. Yavuz, Martin Van Der Zee, Yutao Sui, Tuomas Tirronen, Antti Ratilainen, and David Eriksson

The authors are with Ericsson
AB, Oy LM Ericsson AB.

1 BL stands for bandwidth-re-

duced low-complexity, and
CE stands for coverage
enhancement.

Digital Object Identifier:
10.1109/MNET.2017.1700082

ABSTRACT

In 3GPP LTE Release 13, Narrowband Internet
of Things (NBoT) was standardized for providing,
wide-area connectivity for massive machine-type
communications for loT. In LTE Release 14, NB-loT
was further developed to deliver enhanced user
experience in selected areas through the addition
of features such as increased positioning accuracy,
increased peak data rates, the introduction of a
lower device power class, improved non-anchor
carrier operation, multicast, and authorization of
coverage enhancements. In this article, we pro-
vide an overview of these features introduced for
NB-loT in LTE Release 14. An analysis is given on
the applicability of these features and their benefits
to enhance the NB-loT radio access technology.

INTRODUCTION

The networked society is at our hands, and the
Internet of Things (loT) is the ongoing paradigm
shift within communications. In the networked
society, everything that benefits from a connec-
tion can be and will be connected. The major
change lies in that not only people will be con-
nected, but also devices. The connectivity for
these devices is referred to as machine-type com-
munication (MTC) [1]. Unlike human generated
communication (e.g., surfing or streaming using
smartphones or tablets), the key requirement for
MTC is the importance of enabling economical
wireless connectivity for massive numbers of
devices. Examples of different loT applications
are given in Fig. 1. Not only must the cost of the
devices be low, the network capacity be sufficient,
and the device battery life be long enough to
make charging or battery replacement obsolete,
but coverage should also be improved to reach
devices in challenging locations [1].

To provide affordable solutions for massive
numbers of MTC devices, the Third Generation
Partnership Project (3GPP) dedicated an immense
effort during LTE Release 13 to develop two new
cellular technologies: LTE-MTC (LTE-M), where a
new user equipment (UE) category, Cat. M1, was
introduced, and Narrowband loT (NB-loT) where
UE category Cat. NB1 was introduced. A Cat. M1
UE, a.k.a. an LTE BL/CE UE,' operates in 1.4 MHz
bandwidth, and supports a data rate up to 1 Mb/s
in both downlink and uplink. It also has support
for mobility, that is, handover to neighboring cells,
and voice over LTE (VoLTE) service. Therefore,
Cat. M1 UEs are suitable for loT applications such
as wearables and asset tracking. A Cat. NB1 UE
operates only in 200 kHz bandwidth. These are
loT devices with ultra-low complexity that can be
used for services that have no strict requirements

for data rate, latency, or mobility, but require mas-
sive deployment of low-cost devices (e.g., meters
and sensors).

In Fig. 1, we illustrate different loT use cases
that are suitable for the use of LTE-M and/or
NB-loT. It is worth mentioning that in LTE Release
14 [2], a new category of LTE-M UEs, Cat. M2,
was introduced that can provide data rates up to
4 Mb/s in downlink and 7 Mb/s in uplink. Cat.
M2 UEs are desired for loT applications that need
higher data rate (e.g., video surveillance), but
require a lower device cost compared to regular
LTE UEs.

MTC is an important component of next (fifth)
generation mobile telecommunications (a.k.a.
5G). Both 3GPP and the International Telecom-
munication Union (ITU) have defined 5G require-
ments for massive MTC (mMTC). The requirement
for mMTC connection density is the same in both
cases (i.e., 1,000,000 devices) fulfilling certain
quality of service, and should be supported per
square kilometer. In addition, 3GPP defines 5G
requirements for battery life, latency, and bit rate.
Both LTE-M and NB-loT are candidates for fulfilling
these requirements and thus to be considered as
5G technologies [3, 4].

In this article, we provide an overview of the
enhancements made for NB-loT in LTE Release 14.
Some of these enhancements may help NB-loT
toward fulfilling the 5G requirements. These features
are introduced, described, and analyzed. Before
that, the background of Release 13 NB-IcT is given.
Finally, we provide discussion and conclusions on
the relevance of this in a wider context, related to
both the applicability and the relevance for 5G.

GPP LTE NB-IoT RELEASE 13 BACKGROUND

To provide massive MTC connectivity, togeth-
er with LTE-M, NB-loT was standardized in LTE
Release 13. NB-loT is a cellular radio access
technology that provides low-power wide-area
(LPWA) loT connectivity in licensed spectrum,
unlike short-range technologies in unlicensed
spectrum, including Bluetooth, ZigBee, and so
on, and unlike LPWA technologies including Sig-
Fox, LoRaWAN, and so on. The 3GPP design tar-
gets for Release 13 were those typical for MTC:
long device battery life, low device complexity to
ensure low cost, support for massive numbers of
devices, and coverage enhancements to be able
to reach devices in basements and other challeng-
ing locations.

It is possible to deploy NB-oT in a narrow sys-
tem bandwidth (i.e., 200 kHz). The technology
also provides enhanced coverage, up to 164 dB
maximum coupling loss (MCL), is energy-efficient
to provide long battery life, and is of low com-

0890-8044/17/$25.00 © 2017 IEEE

EEE Network - November/December 2017

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:29:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

&

===== Overview_of_3GPP_Release_14_Enhanced_NB-IoT-2..txt =====
plexity to enable low-cost devices [5]. NB-loT has
three deployment options and can be deployed
either inside an LTE carrier (in-band), in the guard
band of it (guard band), or in its own designated
spectrum (standalone).

Coverage enhancement is one of the attrac
tive features offered by NB-loT. NB-loT can offer
up to 20 dB? enhanced coverage in all operation
modes compared to the general packet radio
services (GPRS) system. This coverage enhance-
ment is mostly achieved through repetitions in
time, together with power boosting in in-band and
guard band operation modes.

NB-loT reuses the LTE design to a large extent,
including numerologies, channel modulation and
coding schemes, and higher layer protocols. In the
downlink, orthogonal frequency-division multiple
access (OFDMA) is used, while the uplink uses
single-carrier frequency-division multiple access
(SC-FDMA) [6]. This ensures fast development
and deployment of NB-loT products for existing
LTE equipment and software vendors.

The major difference between NB-loT and
legacy LTE resides in the uplink design, where a
subcarrier spacing of 3.75 kHz is introduced in
NB-IoT in addition to the 15 kHz used in legacy
LTE systems [6]. In NB-loT, resource allocations
using less than twelve 15-kHz-subcarriers in the
uplink are also introduced. For the narrowband
physical random access channel (NPRACH), only
3.75 kHz subcarrier spacing is supported. For
the narrowband physical uplink shared channel
(NPUSCH), both 3.75 kHz and 15 kHz subcarrier
spacing are supported by single-tone transmission,
whereas only 15 kHz subcarrier spacing is sup-
ported for multi-tone transmission. Studies have
shown that the introduction of 3.75 kHz subcar-
rier spacing can have some negative impact on
coexistence with the 15 kHz subcarrier spacing,
but the impact can be partly compensated by
optimizing the scheduling algorithms [7].

To reduce the device cost, NB-loT only requires
a system bandwidth of 200 kHz for both uplink
and downlink. Only half-duplex (HD) frequen-
cy-division duplex (FDD) is supported, and only
one receiving antenna in the device. In addition,
many functions have been simplified to further
reduce the device costs. In the downlink, only
quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) and convo-
lutional code are used, which is less demanding,
for the UEs compared to the use of turbo code
in LTE. In the uplink, to reduce peak-to-average
power ratio (PAPR), single-tone transmissions with
x/2-binary phase shift keying (BPSK) and n/4-
QPSK are adopted [6]. Considering the device
complexity, an NB-loT device is not required to
decode the narrowband physical downlink con-
trol channel (NPDCCH) and narrowband physical
downlink shared channel (NPDSCH) in 1 ms, in
contrast to the legacy LTE system. Instead, for-
ward scheduling is introduced; that is, NPDCCH
and NPDSCH are transmitted subsequently with
at least 4 ms delay in between to guarantee suf-
ficient NPDCCH decoding time at the UE. Only
one single adaptive asynchronous hybrid automat-
ic repeat request (HARQ) process is supported
for both uplink and downlink. The maximum sup-
ported transport block sizes (TBSs) are reduced
to 680 bits for downlink and 1000 bits for uplink,
respectively [5].

Voice services,

Wearables, e-health

Smart grid
as] management

i Environment monitoring

Smart city, guy,

smart home @

video surveillance

Vehicle/asset tracking

&¢S cE ast

Smart metering,
hap) | smartbuilding” = ARQ
7 | home automation
Cs}

~1000

~100

{5/q)] suone>idde 10] snouen soy aes eyep payewins3

FIGURE 1. Examples of different loT use cases.

To further reduce the system information (SI)
acquisition time and reduce the latency of setting
up a connection, several optimizations have been
introduced in NB-loT. Instead of using the system
information blocks, the SI value tag and a new
access barring indication are broadcasted in the
narrowband master information block in NB-loT.
This reduces the efforts for the UE, especially in
extended coverage, to verify the SI before access
ing the network. Furthermore, new higher-layer
optimizations such as data over non-access stra-
tum and radio resource control (RRC) connec
tion resume procedures are introduced to further
reduce signaling when accessing the network.
These new optimizations significantly reduce the
signaling overhead when transmitting small data
packets.

Release 13 NB-oT supports functions to
improve battery life, such as extended discontinu-
ous reception (eDRX), power saving mode (PSM),
as well as functions to improve capacity (e.g.,
multi-carrier operations). Detailed descriptions of
the NB-loT Release 13 functionalities and deploy-
ment guides are given in [5, 8].

GPP LTE NB-IoT RELEASE 14 FEATURES

To further improve the user experience as well as
cater to more use cases, several enhancements
and new functionalities are introduced for NB-loT
in 3GPP LTE Release 14 NB-loT [9]. The new fea-
tures include positioning, multicast, and a new UE
output power class, whereas the system and UE
throughput, non-anchor carrier operation, mobil-
ity, and service continuity are further enhanced.
In this section, we discuss these new or enhanced
features in detail to see how they help NB-loT
provide better mMTC service, and pave the road
for NB-loT to fulfill the 5G MTC requirements.
Furthermore, currently the work for LTE Release
15 NB-loT is ongoing, and new features are intro-
duced to further improve the NB-loT battery life
and latency and improve performance in more
use cases [10].

POSITIONING
Many loT use cases will require or benefit from
location information, making positioning a vital
dimension of the lo. Example use cases include
wearables, smart bicycles, asset tracking, and
environment monitoring. Release 13 NB-loT only

2 The 20 dB coverage
enhancement was defined
with respect to the weakest
channel in GPRS, that is, the
uplink packet data trafic
channel (PDTCH) coding
scheme 1 (CS-1). Interested
readers can find the detailed
studies and simulation results
in [14].

IEEE Network - November/December 2017

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:29:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

&

===== Overview_of_3GPP_Release_14_Enhanced_NB-IoT-3..txt =====
COF (0t)

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

100

150200250 «300-350 400450500,
Horizontal positoning error (m)

FIGURE 2, NB-loT OTDOA positioning accuracy.

supports basic positioning features through cell
identity (CID), which uses CID information to
associate the device to the area covered by the
serving cell. Advanced positioning techniques are
introduced in Release 14.

The standardization efforts of Release 14 are to:
+ Develop support for the feature of observed

time difference of arrival (OTDOA) for

NB-loT
+ Complete UE measurement requirements for

enhanced CID
The measurement requirements of enhanced
CID include evolved Node B (eNB) Rx-Tx time
difference, and reference signal received power
(RSRP) as well as reference signal received quality
(RSRQ).

OTDOA is a downlink-based positioning meth-
od, where a device measures the times of arriv-
al (TOAs) of positioning reference signals (PRSs)
received from multiple transmitting nodes rela-
tive to a reference node’s PRS transmission to
form the reference signal time difference (RSTD)
measurements. Each RSTD measurement can be
translated into a geographical hyperbola on which
the positioned UE can be assumed to reside. By
considering multiple RSTD measurements, the UE
position can be estimated to be at the crossover
point of the corresponding hyperbolas.

A new reference signal was designed for
OTDOA in NB-loT, referred to as the narrow-
band positioning reference signal (NPRS), which
has synergies with LTE PRS such as reusing the
PRS waveform definition and basic configuration
parameters. Figure 2 presents OTDOA positioning
performance for a device with high timing accura-
cy and two types of radio propagation conditions:
typical urban (TU) and extended pedestrian A
(EPA). The high delay spread of the TU channel
makes it difficult to predict the TOA of the line of
sight channel tap, which leads to degraded per-
formance compared to the EPA channel, which is
characterized by a low delay spread.

The detailed description of simulation setup
and more evaluation results may be found in [11,
references therein]. These results are generated

based on NPRS, and thus are only applicable to
NB-loT. A maximum number of 10 cells are used
in estimating the position, and 100 NPRS trans-
mission subframes are used to achieve the accu-
racy. We refer interested readers to [12] for more
simulation results comparing the OTDOA posi-
tioning accuracy of LTE, LTE-M, and NB-loT.

For NB-loT, several carriers can be config-
ured in a cell (i.e., one anchor-carrier plus several
non-anchor carriers). Hence, the NPRS can be
configured per NB-loT carrier transmitting NPRS.
The NPRS mapping to the NB-loT radio resources
is highly flexible and may be indicated with two
parts: part A and part B. The network can con-
figure NPRS using part A alone, part B alone, or
both. Part A is a subframe bitmap of 10 or 40 bits,
and Part B is a configuration mechanism similar to
that of LTE PRS. It specifies the periodicity of posi-
tioning occasions and the number of consecutive
NPRS subframes in a positioning occasion. Parts
A and B may be both configured. In this case,
a subframe contains NPRS if both parts of the
configuration indicate that the subframe contains
PRS.

Multicast

Multicast is group communication, where data is
addressed to a group of users in a single trans-
mission. One use case for multicast is firmware
upgrade to a group of smart meters. Another one
is to reduce latency when addressing large groups
of UEs (e.g. turning street lamps on or off). The
main motivation is efficiency in terms of energy
and resource utilization due to transmitting the
data once rather than multiple times separately
for each device. In LTE Release 14 NB-loT, mul-
timedia broadcast multicast services (MBMS) is
supported through single-cell point-to-multipoint
(SC-PtM). SC-PtM was specified earlier in LTE
Release 13, and a general description of MBMS
operation including details on SC-PtM can be
found in [13, Sec. 15]. The SC-PtM data is car-
ried on the SC-MTCH logical channel, which is
mapped to the NPDSCH physical channel similar
to unicast traffic, and the scheduling of SC-PtM in
NB+oT follows the same principles. In SC-PtM, the
same TBS and coverage enhancement configura-
tions can be used, which leads to similar achiev-
able downlink data rates as in unicast, depending
on the network configuration.

In SC-PtM, the single-cell MBMS control
channel (SC-MCCH) and single-cell MBMS traf-
fic channel (SC-MTCH) are logical channels that
carry control and data traffic, respectively. The
SC-MTCH is the traffic channel that carries the
multicast data transmissions. Scheduling config-
uration for SC-MTCH is provided via SC-MCCH
for NB-loT UEs to locate and receive the ser-
vice of interest. Each SC-PtM service is mapped
to one SC-MTCH. A cell may transmit multiple
SC-MTCHs, but only a single SC-MCCH is trans-
mitted for informing the UEs about the physical
layer scheduling configuration. Both logical chan-
nels are mapped to NPDSCH in the physical layer,
and scheduled using the downlink control infor-
mation in NPDCCH, which is transmitted in accor-
dance with the SC-MCCH information.

Information on SC-MCCH scheduling is broad-
cast in system information block 20-NB. The
modification and scheduling periodicities for

&

IEEE Network - November/December 2017

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:29:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== Overview_of_3GPP_Release_14_Enhanced_NB-IoT-4..txt =====
SC-MCCH are extended compared to LTE due to
repetitions required to support enhanced cover-
age. SC-MCCH message segmentation is support-
ed, and a mechanism similar to SC-MTCH DRX is
used to reduce UE power consumption.

SC-MCCH carries the SC-MTCH scheduling
information, and the configuration options are
similar to the options for SC-MCCH. The rang-
es for the DRX timers and scheduling periodicity
have been extended to accommodate different
coverage scenarios. Considering the downlink
capacity, in an NB+oT cell, the maximum number
of different supported SC-MTCHs is 64.

Lowen Power UE

Release 14 for NB-IoT introduces a new low UE
power class, where the objective is to achieve
smaller form factor, lower device power consump-
tion, and even lower device cost compared to
the 20 dBm devices in NB-loT Release 13. It has
been concluded that the device maximum output
power should not exceed 20 dBm to enable a
system on chip design with an integrated power
amplifier (PA).

In Release 14, a new UE power class with
the maximum allowed output power reduced to
14 dBm was introduced to enable using smaller
battery form factors for NB-loT devices. The low
power class implies a significantly reduced drain
current. As a lower drain current reduces the
wasteful voltage drop, calculated as the product
of the drain current and the battery internal resis-
tance, a low-power UE will make more efficient
use of the available energy provided by a battery.
Beyond this effect, it is not expected that low out-
put power will improve the UE power consump-
tion characteristics, since the lower output power
must be compensated by increased transmission
times to maintain the same energy per bit as a
Release 13 UE achieves.

To maintain the coverage of a lower-power
device in a wide area network, the reduced uplink
power needs to be compensated for by increas-
ing the uplink transmission time to maintain the
energy per transmitted bit. This may negatively
impact the uplink resource utilization and lead to
increased downlink control signaling. To manage
this and control the overall system resource utili-
zation, 3GPP agreed that the MCL for low-pow-
er devices should be relaxed compared to the
Release 13 specification. Here we consider a cov-
erage relaxation of 9 dB, which can be associated
with the difference in output power between 23
and 14 dBm power classes. This means that devic
es experiencing a coupling loss above 164 - (23
-14) = 155 dB to the serving cell are not consid-
ered to fulfill the cell suitability criterion and are
not allowed to access the system. Figure 3 shows
average UL resource utilization for two networks
based on 14 dBm devices and 23 dBm devices.
The figure shows that the increased resource uti-
lization observed for the 14 dBm case can be
controlled by enforcing the mentioned MCL lim-
itation.

The downlink resource utilization may also
be impacted if the eNB does not possess accu-
rate knowledge of the used device output power.
This is a consequence of the eNB estimating the
coupling loss to a connected device based on
the received uplink power. The introduction of

100
—14 dBm, 164 dB MCL
14 dBm, 155 dB MCL|
90 f] ~---25dBm, 164 dB MCL.
80

50

40

30

Average resource ut

20

0 2 4 6 8 10 2 4
Access arrival intensity (accesses/s)

FIGURE 3, Average uplink resource utilization as a function of the user access
arrival intensity.

a 14 dBm power class in addition to the existing
Release 13 power classes introduces an ambigu-
ity that called for early indication of the device
power class. The NB-loT connection setup pro-
cedure was therefore improved in Release 14 to
allow the serving eNB to acquire the device capa-
bilities, including the power class, during the early
phases of the connection setup.

MutTI-CARRIER ENHANCEMENTS

The NB-loI Release 13 design target for capacity
largely had the 6 x 104 devices/km? of the pre-
ceding study [14] in mind, whereas from Release
14 the ITU 5G requirement [4] of 6 x 10° devic
es/km? is of main interest. The NB-loT system can
be contained in a carrier of 200 kHz bandwidth,
and to increase capacity, multiple carriers can be
deployed (i.e., multiple cells or systems). How-
ever, in this narrow bandwidth the continuous
broadcast of system information and synchroni-
zation signals will take a quite large part of the
downlink resources, above 50 percent for some
configurations. Therefore, multi-carrier operation
was already introduced in Release 13 in which
there is one anchor carrier carrying this always-
on broadcast signaling and possible non-anchor
carriers for offloading of data traffic and increased
capacity.

In Release 13, the non-anchor carriers are
restricted to offload devices in active state (RRC
connected). That is, all devices will perform RRC
idle mode operations, such as monitoring of pag-
ing and random access, on the anchor carrier, but
the eNB can, after the RRC connection setup or
RRC connection, resume messaging to direct a
device to a non-anchor carrier for the duration of
its connected session.

The obvious drawback is that paging and ran-
dom access are likely to become capacity bot-
tlenecks. Therefore, a natural enhancement of
multi-carrier operation in Release 14 was for
devices to be able to both monitor paging and
perform random access on non-anchor carriers.
Devices will still “camp” on the anchor carrier in

IEEE Network - November/December 2017

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:29:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

&

===== Overview_of_3GPP_Release_14_Enhanced_NB-IoT-5..txt =====
In conditions where repetition:

is limited; instead, itis th

ictual transmission times that limit the ac

re used, the impact on throughput from the NPDCCH scheduling gaps
ble data rates, This also

implies that the two HARQ processes feature is mostly useful in good radio conditions,

Carrier Stand-alone/ In-band
Guard-band overhead —_ overhead
Rel-13 Anchor 40% 59 percent
Rel-14 Anchor 44% 62 percent
Rel-13 Non-anchor 109 38 percent
Rel-14 Non-anchor 10% 38 percent
TABLE 1. Multi-carrier system overhead.
NPDSCH — NPUSCH
Category NB 2 79 kb/s 106 kb/s
Se for2 iar kb/s 158.5 kb/s

TABLE, NB-IoT release 14 peak data rates.

the sense that mobility measurements and syn-
chronization are always carried out on the anchor
carrier. On non-anchor carriers, the only signals
broadcasted are the narrowband reference signals
(NRSs), but only when needed for either paging
or random access, or when there is a device in
RRC connected state.

For the random access procedure, up to three
NPRACH resources with a one-to-one mapping
to the three possible coverage enhancement lev-
els can be configured for a non-anchor carrier. A
device will randomly select an NPRACH resource
among all carriers which have NPRACH config-
ured for its coverage enhancement level. Since
all Release 13 devices will choose an NPRACH
resource on the anchor carrier, a biased NPRACH
selection is introduced for Release 14 devices
such that a selection weight is used to be able to
achieve, say, an uneven load distribution in sys-
tems containing both Release 13 and 14 devices.
Up to a total of 16 carriers can be configured for
random access.

For the monitoring of paging, the paging occa-
sions, and hence the paging load, will be spread
over the anchor carrier and the non-anchor car-
riers configured with paging. Since there can be
significant differences between downlink carriers
due to differences in deployment modes, load
from broadcast, and Release 13 devices, and
especially power boosting, uneven paging load
distribution can be achieved by configuring a
weight per paging carrier. Up to a total of 16 car-
riers can be configured for paging.

An analysis of the downlink overhead contrib-
uted by reference signals, broadcast channels,
system information, and the new system informa-
tion block carrying the non-anchor configurations
is provided in Table 1 for all types of carriers. It
is seen that the non-anchor gain is an overhead
reduction of at least 30 percent-units for stand-
alone or guard band carriers and 21 percent-units

for in-band carriers. This means that for the stand-
alone case, the same downlink capacity increase
as achieved by deploying three additional anchor
carriers could in fact be achieved by only two
additional non-anchor carriers. For Release 14,
this capacity increase also applies to NPRACH
and paging.

INCREASED DATA RATE

NB-IoT is intended for the ultra-low complexity
loT market segment. A key component to secure
low-complexity device design is to limit the
requirements on device buffer memory and com-
putational processing power. These limitations
result in a downlink peak data rate of ~25 kb/s
and the supported uplink peak data rate of ~65
kb/s in NB-loT Release 13.

To support more diverse traffic scenari-
os, Release 14 introduces a new NB-loT device
category, Cat. NB 2, supporting 2536 bits TBS
in both the uplink and the downlink. Besides
increasing the maximum TBS, the optional sup-
port for a second HARQ process was also spec
ified. This further increased the peak data rates.
Table 2 summarizes the achievable physical layer
peak data rates for the new device category tak-
ing device processing and NPDCCH scheduling
delays into account.

As the larger TBSs are introduced at the
expense of an increased code rate, which reduces
the robustness of the radio link, it is expected that
the higher data rate is mainly intended for devic-
es experiencing favorable radio conditions. The
throughput gains achieved by a second HARQ
process is mainly due to reducing the overhead
from NPDCCH scheduling gaps, which limits the
achievable throughput in good radio conditions.
In conditions where repetitions are used, the
impact on throughput from the NPDCCH sched-
uling gaps is limited; instead, it is the actual trans-
mission times that limit the achievable data rates.
This also implies that the two HARQ processes
feature is mostly useful in good radio conditions.

Connected Mope MOBILITY ENHANCEMENT

NBHoT supports stationary and low-mobility UEs.
Handover is not supported in NB-loT, and when
the UE moves out of the coverage area of the
serving cell, the UE will experience radio link fail-
ure (RLF). A UE that supports NB-loT supports
data transfer via the control plane. Optionally,
the UE can also support data transfer via the user
plane. When the UE supports data transfer via the
user plane, the RRC connection re-establishment
procedure is supported, which means that after
RLF is detected, the UE tries to find a suitable cell
through cell selection.

If the UE finds a suitable cell, the UE will try
to re-establish the connection on that cell and
resume data transfer. The RRC re-establishment
intends to hide the temporary loss of the radio
interface to the upper layers. RRC re-establish-
ment for a UE only supporting data transfer via
the control plane was added in Release 14 [15].

RELEASE ASSISTANCE INDICATION

NB-loT is designed to support UEs that have
occasional small amounts of data to transmit or
receive, according to the traffic model defined in
[14, Annex E]. Even though the UE spends most

0

&

EEE Network - November/December 2017

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:29:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== Overview_of_3GPP_Release_14_Enhanced_NB-IoT-6..txt =====
of its time in idle mode in an (extended) DRX to
save power, when the UE has data to send and/
or receive, it is important that these data trans-
missions are completed as soon as possible and
with the least amount of signaling overhead. After
data transmissions have been completed, the
eNB releases the connection, and the UE returns
to idle mode to save power. The eNB typically
releases the connection using a data inactivity
timer; that is, the connection is released when
no more data is sent or received after some time.
Compared to the data transmission times, this is
a relatively long inactivity time during which the
UE is waiting to be released, especially in normal
coverage. In NB-loT the traffic use cases can be
rather predictable, and the UE may have good
knowledge when it has finished transmitting and/
or receiving data. The release assistance indica-
tion procedure allows the UE to send an indica-
tion to the eNB when it does not have more data
to send or receive. The eNB can use this indica-
tion to release the UE more quickly to idle mode.

RESTRICTION ON THE USE OF COVERAGE ENHANCEMENTS

To obtain enhanced coverage up to 164 dB
MCL, a significant amount of network resources
is required (e.g., repetitions). With authorization
of the coverage enhancements feature, the net-
work can restrict the use of coverage enhance-
ments to a UE based on subscription information.
In Release 14, an NB-loT UE is required to sup-
port this feature. In idle mode, the authorization
is enforced by the UE and in connected mode
by the eNB. The UE receives authorization infor-
mation during attachment and tracking area
update (TAU) from the network. When the UE
is not authorized to use coverage enhancement,
the UE shall apply an offset to the measured sig-
nal strength of the selected cell in NB-loT, and
the UE shall not use the cell selection criterion
for enhanced coverage in MTC. When the signal
strength drops below the minimum threshold (.e.,
the cell is not suitable for the UE to camp on in
idle mode), the UE is required to try to find anoth-
er suitable cell.

CONCLUSIONS

Both new features and enhanced functionalities
are introduced in NB-loT 3GPP LTE Release 14.
The new features broaden the use cases that can
be offered by NB-loT, whereas the enhanced func
tionalities increase the system capacity flexibly, as
well as improve the energy efficiency.

NB-loT systems especially focus on the low-
cost device with delay-tolerant services. From the
discussion, we can see that NB-loT in Release 14
is another significant step that paves the road for
the NB-loT technology to fulfill the massive MTC
requirements in 5G. Not only can more diversified
services be supported by NB-loT; it also enables
the possibility to further reduce the cost of the
devices. Furthermore, due to the flexibility of sup-
porting several operation modes, the NB-loT sys-
tem is foreseeable to be future-proof in operating
and coexisting with the next generation (i.e., 5G)
new radio technologies.

REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP TS 22.368, “Service Requirements for Machine-Type
Communications (MTC),” v. 13.1.0, Dec. 2014; http://
www.3gpp.org, accessed Apr. 30, 2017,

Not only can more diversified services be supported by NB-loT; it also enables the possibility to further

reduce the cost of devices. Furthermore, due to the flexibility of supporting several operation modes,

the NB-loT system is foreseen to be future-proof in operating anc
(ie., 56) new radio technologies.

[2] 3GPP RP-161464, “Revised WID for Further Enhanced MTC
for LTE,” Sept. 2016; http://www.3gpp.org, accessed Apr.
30, 2017.

[3] 3GPP TR 38.913, “Study on Scenarios and Requirements
for Next Generation Access Technologies,” v. 14.2.0, Mar.
2017, [available: http://www.3gpp.org, accessed Apr. 30,
2017.

[4] ITU Doc. 5D/TEMP/300€, “Minimum Requirements Related
to Technical Performance for IMT-2020 Radio Interface(s),”
Feb. 2017; http://www.itu.int/pub/R-REP-M.21 34-2008,
accessed Apr. 30, 2017.

[5] Y-P. E. Wang et al, “A Primer on 3GPP Narrowband Internet
of Things (NB-IoT),” IEEE Commun. Mag, vol. 55, no. 3, Mar.
2017.

[6] 3GPP TS 36.211, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access
(E-UTRA); Physical Channels and Modulation,” v. 14.3.0,
June 2017; http://Awww.3gpp.org, accessed Aug. 30, 2017.

[7] 3GPP R1-160776, “Discussion on Multiplex of Uplink Sig-
nal with Different Subcarrier Spacing,” MediaTek Inc, Feb.
2016; http://www.3gpp.org, accessed July 5, 2017.

[8] GSMA, “NB-loT Deployment Guide to Basic Feature set
Requirements,” v. 1.0, Aug. 2017; https://www.gsma.com/,
accessed Aug. 31, 2017.

[9] 3GPP RP-161901, “Revised Work Item Proposal: Enhance-
ments of NB-loT,” Sept. 2016; http://www.3gpp.org,
accessed Apr. 30, 2017.

[10] 3GPP RP-171428, “Revised WID on Further NB-loT
Enhancements,” June 2017; http://www.3gpp.org, accessed
Aug. 31, 2017.

[11] 3GPP R1-1611118, “OTDOA Performance for NB-IoT,”
Ericsson, Nov. 2016; http://www.3gpp.org, accessed Apr.
30, 2017.

[121 X. Lin et al, “Positioning for the Internet of Things: A 3GPP
Perspective,” IEEE Commun. Mag, vol. 55, no. 4, Apr. 2017.

[13] 3GPP TS 36.300, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio
‘Access (E-UTRA) and Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio
Access Network (E-UTRAN); Overall Description; Stage 2,”
v. 14.3.0, June 2017; http://www.3gpp.org, accessed Aug.
31, 2017.

[14] 3GPP TR 45.820, “Cellular System Support for Ultra-Low
Complexity and Low Throughput Internet of Things (CloT),”
v. 13.1.0, Nov. 2015; http://www.3gpp.org, accessed Apr.
30, 2017.

[15] 3GPP_R2-1706165, “Introduction of RRC Connection
Re-Establishment for NB-loT Control Plane,” Qualcomm
Inc., Huawei, HiSilicon, Gemalto N.V., May 2017; http://
www.3gpp.org, accessed July 5, 2017.

BIOGRAPHIES

ANDREAS HOGLUND (andreas hoglund@ericsson.com) has a Mas
ter of Science in engineering physics (2002) and a Ph.D. in con-
densed matter physics (2007) from Uppsala University, Sweden.
He is currently a senior researcher at Ericsson Research and, since
he joined in 2008, has worked on HSPA, LTE, system simulations,
5G research in the METIS project, 3GPP standardization, and
more. He has worked on the standardization of LTE MTC (Cat
M1) and NB4oT from the start in Release 13 and is currently the
team leader for the team within Ericsson Research handling the
evolution and research of the higherdayer aspects thereof,

XINGQIN LIN (xingqin.lin@eriesson.com) received his Ph.D.
degree in electrical and computer engineering from the Uni-
versity of Texas at Austin (UT Austin) in 2014. He is currently a
research engineer at Ericsson Research Silicon Valley. He held
summer internships at Qualcomm CR&D, Nokia Networks,
and Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs. He received the MCD Fellowship
from UT Austin and was recognized by Ericsson for outstanding
Contributions to NBoT research and standards. He serves as an
Editor of IEEE Communications Letters.

OLOF LiBeRG (olof.liberg@ericsson.com) is a master researcher
at Ericsson. After studies at Uppsala University, he received a
Bachelor's degree in business and economics and a Master's
degree in engineering physics. He joined Ericsson in 2008 and
has specialized in the design of cellular systems for machine
type communications and the Internet of Things. He has, over
the years, actively contributed to work in several standardization
bodies such as 3GPP, ETSI, and the MulteFire Alliance.

existing with the next generation

IEEE Network - November/December 2017

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:29:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

&

===== Overview_of_3GPP_Release_14_Enhanced_NB-IoT-7..txt =====
AU BEHRAVAN (ali.behravan@ericsson.com) received his Ph.D. in
electrical engineering from Chalmers University of Technology
in 2006. He has been with Ericsson Research in Stockholm since
2007, where he is currently working on standardization of 5G.
His research interests include physical layer design of mobile
broadband communications, machine-to-machine communica
tions, and ultra-reliable and low-latency communications. He
received his B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees, both in electrical engi-
neering, from Ferdowsi University of Mashad, Iran, in 1994 and
1997.

EMRE A. YAVUZ (emre.yavuz@ericsson.com) received his B.Sc.
and M.Sc. degrees in electrical and electronics engineering at
METU in Ankara, Turkey, in 1995 and 1998, respectively. He
Was a software engineer at Alcatel in Toronto developing safe-
ty-ctitical realtime microprocessor firmware for embedded com-
mand, control, and communication applications in automated
train systems from 1999 to 2001. He received his Ph.D. degree
in electrical and computer engineering at the University of Brit-
ish Columbia in Vancouver in 2007. He worked as a technical
consultant for a network operator in Vancouver from 2007 to
2009 prior to joining the School of Electrical Engineering at KTH
in Stockholm as a postdoctoral fellow. He is now a researcher
at Ericsson in Stockholm working on L2/L3 standardization and
RAN system design. He is invoived in the standardization of
machine type communication (MTC/NB-IoT) in new generation
cellular networks.

MARTIN VAN DER Zee (martin.van.der.zee@ericsson.com) has
a Master's degree in computer science (1989) and Licentiate
degree (1991) in telecommunications from the University of
Twente. Between 1991 and 1995 he was a research assistant at
the University of Twente, He is currently a researcher at Ericsson
Technology & Research. Since he joined Ericsson in 1995, he
has worked on protocol simulations, Bluetooth Link Manager,
and WCDMA/LTE L2/L3. He has been a Bluetooth standard-
ization delegate, and has been a 3GPP RAN2 delegate since
2007. As a RAN2 delegate, he has been working on WCDMA
and NBHOT (LTE).

YUTAO SUI (yutao.sui@ericsson.com) received his Ph.D. degree
in communication systems from Chalmers University of Tech-
nology, Gothenburg, Sweden. His main research interests are in
design and analysis of physical layer algorithms, multiple access,
vehicular small cells, and massive machine-type communication.
He is currently a standardization researcher at Ericsson, Stock
holm, Sweden, with focus on machine-type communication
related standardization.

TUOMAS TIRRONEN (tuomas.tirronen@ericsson.com) is a senior
researcher at Ericsson Research, which he joined in 2012. He
received his M.Sc. in teletraffic theory in 2006 from Helsinki
University of Technology and D.Sc. in communications engi-
neering in 2010 from Aalto University. He is currently working,
on developing concepts and standards for 4G and 5G wireless
technologies with focus on machine-type communications and
the Internet of Things, performance evaluation, and energy
efficiency. He is also currently a 3GPP RAN2 delegate with
focus on MTC and NB-loT. He has (co-) authored several con-
ference and journal papers, and is involved in innovation work
and patenting.

ANTTI RATILAINEN (antti.ratilainen@ericsson.com) is an experi-
enced researcher at Ericsson Research, which he joined in 2014.
He received his Master of Science in communications engineer-
ing in 2014 from Aalto University, carrying out his Master's the-
sis work at Ericsson Research studying dual connectivity in LTE
networks. Currently he is involved in developing and evaluating
12/13 concepts and contributing to standardization of 4G and
5G cellular networks with focus on machine-type communica-
tions.

DAVID ERIKSSON (david.a.eriksson@ericsson.com) has a Master
of Science in engineering physics (2001) from Umea Universi-
ty and a Ph.D. in theoretical high energy physics (2009) from
Uppsala University. He joined Ericsson Research in 2011 and
is currently a senior researcher. Since he joined he has worked
on HSPA, LTE, system simulation, performance evaluations, and,
most recently, system aspects of MTC and NB-IoT.

n

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:

&

IEEE Network - November/December 2017

:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

