===== A_Framework_for_the_Design_and_Deployment_of_Large-Scale_LPWAN_Networks_for_Smart_Cities_Applications-1..txt =====
| | HOMSSI_LAYOUT.indd 53

®

FOCUS ON SMART CITIES

fl FRAMEWORK FOR THE DESIGN AND
DEPLOYMENT OF LARGE-SCALE LPWAN
NETWORKS FOR SMART CITIES APPLICATIONS

Bassel Al Homssi, Akram Al-Hourani, Kagiso Magowe, James Delaney, Neil Tom, Joan Ying, Hans Wolf, Simon Maselli,
Sithamparanathan Kandeepan, Ke Wang, and Karina Mabell Gomez

ABSTRACT

The Internet of Things (loT) enables the connectivity of massive numbers of sensors to facilitate the delivery of immense sets of data. This
valuable data promotes higher productivity, effectiveness, and sustainability. With the accelerating global urbanization, many cities and sub-
urbs are expected to face increasing challenges related to urban planning, resources and livability. These challenges stimulate new oppor-
tunities for communities and governments to collaboratively incubate new planning and development strategies relying on the insightful
loT data. This concept is commonly referred to as smart cities. Accordingly, a wave of smart cities implementations is currently emerging.
However, the underlying loT network deployments are developed in silos, and thus require more harmonization. In this paper, we present
a design and deployment framework for large-scale low power wireless access networks (LPWAN) in order to harmonize and guide the
end-to-end process. This framework is derived from the acquired expertise and learned lessons from the largest open-access LPWAN deploy-
ment in Australia. The framework includes various aspects related to the state-of-the-art design techniques, smart cities use-case scenarios,
project development and implementation, network management, and finally a robust performance testing mechanism for quality of service
assurance. All these components were put into rigorous verification and testing under this realistic large-scale loT network deployment.

INTRODUCTION ed battery life of several years. A widely deployed LPWAN

technology is LoRaWAN, supported by the LoRa Alliance
More than 68 percent of the world’s population is projected which is an association of more than 500 member companies.
to live in urban cities by 2050 [1] almost doubling the number LoRaWAN utilizes a proprietary modulation and coding scheme
of their residents. Growth of this magnitude would certainly based on a chirp spread spectrum (CSS) technique which
provide many economic opportunities, but will equally present spreads over a lager radio spectrum for better interference
several challenges including higher traffic congestion, more pres- immunity. Signals with different spreading factors can coexist in
sure on natural resources, and increased levels of CO, emissions ___ the channel. Moreover, increasing the spreading factor enhanc-
and other pollutants. This projection has led many governments __es the communication link budget, making the signal more
around the world to adopt a transformative smart cities vision to resilient to remote deployments. However, a higher spreading
address these arising challenges. The renewed focus on smarter _ factor also lowers the data rate, leading to longer transmission
cities will not only lead to a better utilization of infrastructure time and increasing energy drainage [5].

and improvements in energy efficiency and services, but will Over the past few decades, the deployment of large-scale
also ensure that cities remain globally competitive and attractive. __ networks was almost always associated with large telco oper-
Smart cities include many application scenarios which have ators. However, with the advent of simpler LPWAN technol-
particularly been of a great interest to local governments [2] ogies, emergent network deployments can be carried out by

ranging from smart parking, pollution monitoring, occupancy smaller sized new comers to the market or by the end-users
estimation, smart lighting, smart metering, asset tracking, waste themselves. Accordingly, the harmonization and integration of
management to waterevel monitoring. Among the many smart such deployments becomes of utmost importance to allow the
cities technology drivers is the Internet of Things (loT) that plays LPWAN to provide a seamless continuum and avoid unnec-
a major role in shaping smart cities and their future road-map _ essary capital investment. The harmonization needs to be
[3]. At the heart of the smart city model, a massive number of accounted for not only in the technology, but also in the way

loT sensors collect data from their surroundings to enable back-__ the network is designed, tested, and in the quality assurance.
end analytics [4]. These analytics draw insightful understand- Ongoing standardization efforts for loT data network infrastruc-
ing of the current state of a city and project different solutions _ tures exist [6]; nevertheless, standardization for the network
based on the evolving Artificial Intelligence (Al). design and implementation phases is still underexplored.

To cater to battery-powered loT wireless devices, several In this article, we present an end-to-end framework based
technologies have been proposed, collectively referred to as__on the lessons learned from the deployment of a large-scale
low power wide area networks (LPWAN) aiming for an extend- —_ LPWAN for smart cities application in Melbourne, Australia. The

framework provides a blueprint to guide the process of network
Bassel Al Homssi, Akram Al-Hourani, Kagiso Magowe, James Delaney, Neil Tom, development all the way from the use-case scenario creation,
Sithamparanathan Kandeepan, Karina Mabell Gomez, and Ke Wang are with the to the radio design methodology, network architecture, net-
School of Engineering, RMIT University. work management, implementation and finally the testing and
Hans Wolf and Joan Ying are with the City of Whittlesea Council and Banyule City quality assurance. The framework is developed and put into
Council, respectively. action through the development of the Northern Melbourne
Simon Maselli is with Minnovation Australia, Smart Cities Network (NMSCN) project, which is the largest
Corresponding author A. AFHourani: e-mail: akram.hourani@rmit.edu.au single deployment of an open-access LPWAN network in Vic-
Digital Object denier: 10.1109/107M.001.2000179 toria, Australia. The NMSCN network has already integrated
IEEE Internet of Things Magazine * March 2021 2576-3180/21/$25.00 © 2021 IEEE 53

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 06:38:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

seare sav au | |

===== A_Framework_for_the_Design_and_Deployment_of_Large-Scale_LPWAN_Networks_for_Smart_Cities_Applications-2..txt =====
oT gateway Hy
ToT device a

Coverage a)

FIGURE 1. loT Smart city concept in different urban environments where radio coverage largely depends on the interference levels and

the propagation conditions.

48 LoRaWAN gateways and 294 sensors across the five con-
tributing local council areas. The framework underscores the
network design, radio frequency testing, connectivity testing,
and quality assurance of the network. Ultimately, the frame-
work is aimed to help network planning engineers, researchers
and decision makers alike to gain insightful understanding of
the challenges and opportunities of large scale deployments,
as well as facilitate better harmonization in future loT networks
and expansions.

NORTHERN MELBOURNE SMART CITIES NETWORK

The Australian Government launched the smart cities plan in
2016 as a long-term framework to support the growth of the
cities and suburbs. The aim of this framework is to achieve high-
er sustainability, better productivity, and more liveable cities.
One of the main pillars of this plan is the use of Smart Technok-
ogy to drive investment and policies [7]. Smart Technology is
a broad term, but the plan has further emphasized the impor-
tance of open and real time data for informing better policies
and planning, To kick start the plan, AUD $50 million (around
USD $35 million) were awarded in the form of competitive
grants to the bidding councils.

The bid to build the NMSCN network was successfully select-
ed and the project was awarded AUD $1.5 million to build an
open loT network covering spots across the five contributing
councils [8]. The network is purposed to gather sensor data
to support further analytics required to monitor and improve
the efficiency of existing services and to ultimately support the
potential of new service delivery. The NMSCN is overarching a
diverse combination of inner city, interface, and rural councils
as illustrated in Fig. 1. To offer services to their respective com-
munities, the contributing local councils maintain many assets
such as public buildings, parks, footpaths, roads, playgrounds,
public toilets, and public BBQs, among many others. However,
prior to the Australian Government initiative, councils invested
a considerable amount of time and money in the construction
and maintenance of public assets with little data showcasing
their actual usage. Hence, one of the main objectives of the
NMSCN project is to enable the collection of data on the usage
of public assets by the community. This enables councils to pro-
mote the following objectives:

Offer new services such as advising the community about air
quality and water levels in the local creeks.

Develop trigger-based alert systems for both public safety and
internal staff use.

Understand community demands and better allocate assets
and services.

Invest in future services based on data trends and community
behavior prediction.

Motivate innovation by allowing open-access to the network
by the public.

The technical objective of the NMSCN project is to establish
an open-access LoRaWAN network consisting of an initial roll
out of 48 gateways and 294 sensors. Nevertheless, the ultimate
goal of the project is for the network to be scalable and engulf
more sensors managed by the councils or the community in the
short-term future. The choice of the sensors was based on the
overwhelming interest shown by the councils in five use-cases
during the initial consultation phases of the project:

Waste management sensors to capture the bin usage and
determine trends of usage over time across the community.

Water level sensors to monitor the levels of water in creeks
and alert councils in the case of flooding and to monitor levels
in regional area fire fighting water towers.

Occupancy estimation sensors to anonymously capture
data of pedestrian traffic in shopping strips, public parks and
other public areas of interest.

Environmental sensors as a new service to understand local-
ized air quality, humidity, temperature and other environmental
parameters.

Asset tracking sensors to better track mobile council ser-
vices such as street sweepers, mowers and council vehicles to
better allocate these resources.

In total, eight organizations were working together to
deliver this largest open-access loT network in Victoria. The
project is a manifestation of the collaboration work between
councils, universities and industry. Please refer to the official
web page of the project for more details about the contrib-
uting partners. Five Councils came together to be part of the
NMSCN project: City of Whittlesea Council (lead council),
Banyule City Council, Moreland City Council, Mitchell Shire
Council and Nillumbik Shire Council. Royal Melbourne Insti-

54

IEEE Internet of Things Magazine * March 2021

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 06:38:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

| | HOMSSI_LAYOUT.indd 54

seare sav au | |

===== A_Framework_for_the_Design_and_Deployment_of_Large-Scale_LPWAN_Networks_for_Smart_Cities_Applications-3..txt =====
ser Plane

_——— Control Plane

LoRaWAN Gateway control functions

‘LoRaWAN payload data

(C)

LoRaWAN Gateway

= =

LoRaWAN Sensors 4G Sensors

LoRaWAN

janagement System

LoRaWAN data
forwarding

LoRaWAN and 4G
data forwarding I

Data Analytics

== = 4G connectivity (via cellular network)

—— _ LoRaWAN connectivity

=== Internet backbone

FIGURE 4. Cellular loT model network architecture adopted in NMSCN.

tute of Technology (RMIT) University is a partner responsible
for grant preparation, network design, testing and quality
assurance. La Trobe University is another partner respon-
sible for the data analytics and visualization. Minnovation
Australia is the chosen partner responsible for the supply of
the sensors and gateways along with all associated installa-
tion services as well as hardware maintenance and support.
This project attracted two prestigious industry awards from
Municipal Association of Victoria (MAV) Technology Awards
for Excellence 2020, and loT Alliance Australia (loTAA)
Smart Cities Award for 2020.

DESIGN FRAMEWORK

NETWORK ARCHITECTURE

In principle, the adopted layout in NMSCN follows the typical
cellular network topology, where loT devices communicate
directly with their serving LoRaWAN gateways. The network
primarily utilizes LTE backhaul over commercial telecom oper-
ators. In some cases, where the LoRaWAN coverage becomes
inadequate, specifically when the loT devices are quite sparse,
4G LTE radio modules are utilized such that the loT traffic is
handled directly by the commercial telecom operators. Figure 2
illustrates the end-to-end connection and highlights the adopted
network architecture in NMSCN which is constituted of the
following:

loT Devices: having different types of sensors as indicated in
the previous section, equipped with the radio network access
modules.

LoRaWAN Gateways: responsible for the reception, demod-
ulation and decoding of the LoRaWAN transmissions. LORaWAN
Gateways relay the aggregated traffic via LTE backhaul.

LoRaWAN Management Network: used for extracting the
payload data sent from the gateways. For this project, an open
platform, The Things Network (TTN), is utilized to enable public
access to community users.

Network Management System (NMS): developed by the
industry partner, the platform is called Alpha-X'. The platform
monitors and manages the health of the network and its ele-
ments through the control plane. The NMS reduces the man-
agement workload and classifies and predicts battery usage
based on consumption trends. It also provides tools that allow
the user to set up templates of device types and network types
to efficiently assign those settings to multiple devices optimizing

the management in large-scale loT networks. In addition to con
trol plane management, the developed NMS is also responsible
for the aggregation of the payload from both the TTN and LTE
networks, where the aggregated payload data is forwarded to
the data analytic/visualization platform.

Cloud Data Platform: utilized for data storage, analytics,
and visualization. The cybersecurity of the LoRa network is
managed by TTN, whereas that of the 4G network is managed
by the LTE provider. The authentic security of the gateways and
devices is managed by Minnovation instead.

DESIGN METHODOLOGY
The main objective of the radio access network design phase
is to determine suitable locations for the gateways. Figure 3
illustrates the network design process that was developed in
NMSCN. Ideally, each gateway is expected to serve multiple
sensors to optimize the cost-effectiveness of the deployment.
Hence, optimal gateway locations are those nearest to clusters
of sensors. Geographical areas that include clusters of sensors
are referred to as sites. To determine the optimal location of
the gateway for a given site we propose the following scheme:

Site survey: Performing site visits is a crucial step to identify
candidate locations for installing the gateways and sensors. For
instance, it is preferred to install the gateway in an open area
that maximizes the line-of sight probability with the sensors [9].

RF Ray Tracing: After identifying the candidate locations, we
further optimize the selection based on iterative RF ray-tracing
simulations. In addition to the candidate locations, the simulator
also incorporates two important geographic data: (i) the terrain
data, often called digital elevation model (DEM), and (ii) the
building geometry and heights, often referred as the buildings
footprint which is a 2.5D data-set.

Coverage Mapping: The coverage of radio service is
determined by the ability of the receiver to decode the
transmitted message correctly. This is dependent on both
the received signal power and the surrounding noise and
interference. Thus, in addition to the ray-tracing simulation
it is important to get the interference statistics (or at least
the average interference power) around the selected sites
because the network is operating in the license-free ISM
band. See the references cited herewith for further details
about interference modeling [10]-[12]. The power level at
which an acceptable success rate is maintained is called the
sensitivity of the gateway and is dependent on the utilized

IEEE Internet of Things Magazine * March 2021

55

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 06:38:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

| | HOMSSI_LAYOUT.indd 55

seare sav au | |

===== A_Framework_for_the_Design_and_Deployment_of_Large-Scale_LPWAN_Networks_for_Smart_Cities_Applications-4..txt =====
GIS data H Physics
r H {Rectification

Use oe ; RSSI Coverage [Simulated 1 J Network |_[ tnstattaion |_ J .
cases Site survey RF tay tracing ‘mapping [coverage *) locations [7] deployment QA Completion

' Gateway Sensitivity H

H specifications threshold H

H Average ‘ ==

H iH cd Tterference ; | Saas

' RE Optimization J

FIGURE 3. Network design methodology utilized in NMSCN to achieve the the design objectives.

spreading factors in LoRa modulation [5]. Higher spreading
factors provide better coverage, but require longer time-on-
air, which shortens the device's battery lifetime. Hence, it is
desirable to utilize the lowest spreading factor to lower the
operational costs arising from battery replacement. It is sim-
pler to communicate the outcome of this step as a coverage
contour, similar to the one in Fig. 6. Radio coverage design
is typically an iterative process since the obtained coverage
by simulation is still an estimate and cannot incorporate pre-
cisely all real-wold factors, including surface materials and
foliage, among many more. Thus, some sites may require
optimization post-installation using radio frequency (RF) test-
ing, which is further discussed in a later section.

IMPLEMENTATION

The industry partner developed the majority of the loT
devices by integrating commercially available modules and
in-house developed firmware. The integration also includes
the mechanical housing of loT devices and the battery man-
age.ment system. The gateways and some sensors required
larger rechargeable batteries with solar power system inte-
gration. The rooftop installations of the gateways typically
require 60 minutes to complete onsite since the gateways
themselves are self-contained packages that are specifically
designed to minimize site installation. Similarly, each sensor
requires around 45 minutes to install since the sensors are
also self-contained units, whereas larger sensors that require
an external solar panel each needed approximately 1.5 hours
to complete.

One of the main challenges of the project is the stringent
installation timeline in addition to the COVID-19 pandemic that
restricted the typical access to sites and imposed certain work
restrictions. Some installations also included hurdles such as sun
shading which limited the flexibility for solar panel installations
and did not always coincide with the optimal location for cover-
age. Figure 4 illustrates the implementation phase and highlights
examples of the different installation types completed in the
network.

The implementation process started with the installation of
the gateways first in order for the coverage testing to take place
and validate the sensor locations. Accordingly, the results from
the testing are utilized to feedback the design phase in order to
sustain the gateway connectivity.

COVERAGE VALIDATION AND QUALITY ASSURANCE

RF TESTING AND OPTIMIZATION
The validation of the radio network performance is an import-
ant part of the overall verification and quality assurance since
only field measurements can reveal the real performance of
the network in comparison to the expected performance in
the design phase. The proposed methodology utilized for
the testing is illustrated in Fig. 5 where we utilize a hanc-held

LoRaWAN device referred to as a packet tester and further
explained hereafter.

Packet tester: A device we developed at RMIT University in
order to facilitate the radio coverage validation. This device sends
LoRaWAN frames to the deployed network and logs the proper-
ties of these frames including geographic coordinates, spreading
factor, transmit power, and frame sequence number. The devel-
oped device is shown in Fig. 5 alongside the basic end-to-end
architecture of the network testing system. The testing mech-
anism utilizes similar infrastructure to the gateways deployed
along with an additional cloud-based server to extract and store
the data received from the testing device via the LoRaWAN
network. The packet tester is primarily built using available off-
the-shelf modules to achieve better interoperability with common
LoRaWAN network server and/or application server. The param-
eters of testing scenarios are highly configurable, providing the
flexibility to configure the LoRaWAN serial keys as well as the
spreading factor, transmit power, frequency sub-band, and finally
the total number of frames to send for a specific test.

Pin-point test: The first test is to perform pin-point measure-
ments. The packet tester is configured to send a fixed number
of frames once it is positioned at the potential locations of the
loT sensors. The ratio of the number of successful frames to
the total number of frames is used to estimate the probability
of frame success rate. If the probability is higher than a certain
threshold, the sensor location is approved for installation. If that
is not the case, another location is proposed instead.

Coverage test: The second test is conducted via a drive
around the gateway location. The packet tester is configured
to continuously transmit LoORaWAN frames while in-motion on
a selected route. The drive routes are selected to account for
various distances around the gateway as depicted in Fig. 5.

The geographic coordinates are also logged by the packet
tester in order to identify the locations from where the frames
where transmitted. The transmitter log is extracted from the
packet tester, whereas the receiver log is obtained from the
cloud server. Both logs are compared in order to identify the
lost and successful frames.

To expand the measured coverage to a larger grid, we fur-
ther use these frames to tune the simulation-based coverage
model. This is done by tuning the simulated coverage such that
the discrepancy between the simulation and measurements are
minimized, in particular by minimizing the root mean square
error (RMSE) [13]. The resulting coverage of the gateways in
the NMSCN project is depicted in Fig. 6 for data rates DRO and
DRS (spreading factors SF12 and SF7 respectively), The overall
coverage guides the councils to direct future candidate locations
of new sensors as well as identifying black spots where the cov-
erage requires enhancement using future gateway installations.

INSTALLATION QUALITY ASSURANCE AND TROUBLESHOOTING
Quality assurance is performed to assess the implementation
and ensure the connectivity of the different loT radio network

56

IEEE Internet of Things Magazine * March 2021

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 06:38:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

| | HOMSSI_LAYOUT.indd 56

seare sav au | |

===== A_Framework_for_the_Design_and_Deployment_of_Large-Scale_LPWAN_Networks_for_Smart_Cities_Applications-5..txt =====
End-to-End Connectivity

Packet Tester
Device

oy) _ »)

LoRaWAN Gateways

((9))
) — §—

LoRaWAN Network

Management Server Cloud-based data sink

test and sensor location for pin-point test

LoRaWAN gateway ———
(9)
i Cutoff Rss! /¢—Eeedback to minimize error
% Packet Tester __
i device ; ;
By Ray tracing ‘Simulation Maximum
5 RSSI coverage Likelihood
5 Pack
racket tester
Success /Fail [>] Test coverage
= LoRaWAN gateway ——-
. = Packet Tester | Acceptit
i probability is
a @ a Packet tester
above 70%
g . cal Success
3 - Probability
z Clery Packet tester Ra Thee
5 total packets different
jem _| Jocation if not
(a) Maps representing drive route for coverage (b) Test methodology schematic diagram — | (c) Post-processing

FIGURE 4. Installation photos for all the different network elements included in the NMSCN project.

elements. The quality assurance employed in the NMSCN proj-
ect is based on two key criteria:

Connectivity status of network elements: In addition to
the radio coverage verification, we further test the end-to-end
connectivity of gateways and sensors with the NMS. A trouble-
shooting plan is developed to tackle the connectivity issues that
may arise due to coverage limitations or intermittent connec-
tion. The plan also includes troubleshooting steps which include
tuning the spreading factor, transmit power, frequency sub-
band as well as identifying hardware and software deficiencies.
If the issue persists, a 4G module is proposed to substitute the
LoRaWAN module.

Quality of installation: A procedure conducted to ensure
that the physical installation is following the project specifica-
tions and the different international and national organizations’
requirements. This includes the verticality of the antennas, RF
and electrical cabling ratings such as UV protection, as well as
battery performance, PV panels’ performance, cable conduits,
enclosure ratings among many other standards and regulations.

PROJECT MANAGEMENT OF NETWORK DEPLOYMENT

The overall timeline of the project spanned over 18 months
to achieve the following key milestones: (i) smart cities net-
work design, (ii) procurement of gateways, sensors and installa-
tion services, (iii) implementation of the network elements, (iv)
implementation of data visualizations, and (v) broader engage-
ment with the community. The project was managed using
PRINCE2 project management methodology and processes.
Product-based planning is utilized to identify and document a
list of activities to ensure clear communication among the team.
Due to the collaboration of eight different project partners,
monthly team meetings to communicate the project progress,
discuss issues, plan for activities and make decisions were con-
ducted. Furthermore, the goal of this project is to change the
councils’ conventional methodology from reactive to proac-
tive decision making to provide services which are now driven
through data and trends. On the other hand, to raise interest

and awareness, the technical project partners delivered multi-
ple informative workshops followed by targeted meetings to
engage the councils. During the final stages of the project, sev-
eral training sessions have been conducted to provide the coun-
cil staff with expertise to manage the network prior to handover.

LESSONS LEARNED

This project has provided a great opportunity to get detailed
insights both on the technical level and the administrative level
when deploying large-scale loT networks.

TECHNICAL LESSONS

Lesson 1-Conduct a thorough radio plan When
deploying loT networks in urban environments it is import-
ant to validate the marketing claims of many loT technologies
in regards to the distance and performance, as most of the
marketing figures do not report the success rate or the level
of interference at which the measurements are conducted.
Thus, radio planning is a crucial step for successful planning
and dimensioning of the networks, especially for large-scale
multi-gateway networks. This was one of the key success factors
on the project.

Lesson 2-Get the right sensor: With the hype associated
with loT, it is important to frame the targeted outcome from
the collected data, because the choice of the type of sensors
is crucial in achieving the desired outcomes. For instance, an
loT motion detection sensor still cannot provide occupancy
data whereas a sensing camera can. This project leveraged the
strength of the industry partner in developing custom-made sen-
sors and was another key success factor.

Lesson 3-Develop a clear quality assurance process: A
quality assurance process is a paramount framework aiming
to ensure complete implementation, quality installation and
reliable connectivity of loT devices according to the planned
use-cases and network design. This process has both technical
and financial implications and thus needs to be clearly devel-
oped based on industry best practices. In this project, a clear

IEEE Internet of Things Magazine * March 2021

v7

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 06:38:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

| | HOMSSI_LAYOUT.indd 57

seare sav au | |

===== A_Framework_for_the_Design_and_Deployment_of_Large-Scale_LPWAN_Networks_for_Smart_Cities_Applications-6..txt =====
“Gateway Installation

Electrical power cable
inside UV conduit

LoRaWAN gateway
inside enclosure

Electrical feed

ISM-band monopole
antenna

Solar panel to provide

Mechanical support for
solar panel

4G asset tracking sensor
powered via car battery

LoRaWAN bin sensor
powered with battery

4G water level sensor
wered with by

jebbouine

WOE MOISE MEOE | TaeASE MASE
Longitude

roa

the coverage for DR5.

QA process was continuously developed and visited that has
ensured high quality standards.

ADMINISTRATIVE LESSONS

Lesson 4-End-users’ engagement: The end-user engage-
ment is imperative to enable a more directed and timely project
delivery. In this project, the councils were fully engaged, facil-
itating a seamless transition between different project phases
which has led to a timely project delivery.

Lesson 5-Inclusive project management: The importance
of having periodical meetings that involve different stakeholders
(contractor, network designers, data scientists, and clients) leads
to adaptive and robust decision making. This project followed
inclusive decision making that has led to its agile roll-out and
timely completion.

FIGURE 6. Overall NMSCN outdoor coverage map. The light green represents the coverage for DRO while the dark green represents

ADVANCEMENT TO 5G TECHNOLOGIES AND DEPLOYMENT

On one hand 5G, formally known as the IMT-2020 stan-
dard, includes three classes of use cases: (i) mobile broad-
band, (ii) ultra reliable low latency (URLL), and (iii) massive
machine-type communications (mMTC) with a focus on tel
co-deployed networks which sustain a controlled level of
interference and quality of service. On the other hand, unli-
censed LPWAN such as LoRaWAN particularly complement
MMTC use case in 5G by empowering end-users to deploy
their own networks (similar to the amalgam of LoRaWAN
and 4G deployed in this project). This hybrid approach in
having complementary systems, i.e. 5G-mMTC and LPWAN,
is significantly accelerating loT innovation and addresses a
wider range of techno-economic needs. This complementary
nature is akin to the very successful legacy co-existing of
cellular and wireless local area network (WLAN) technolo-

58

IEEE Internet of Things Magazine * March 2021

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 06:38:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

| | HOMSSI_LAYOUT.indd 58

seare sav au | |

===== A_Framework_for_the_Design_and_Deployment_of_Large-Scale_LPWAN_Networks_for_Smart_Cities_Applications-7..txt =====
gies that is continuing to play a major roll in last-mile access
through 5G and Wi-Fi.

CONCLUSION

The deployment of a large-scale network has almost always
been associated with large telecom operators. However, with
the introduction of simplified loT access technologies, the
deployment of large-scale networks is now the responsibility
of broader entities using free-access radio bands. Therefore,
it is crucial to develop a harmonized framework that can
facilitate the different aspects of network deployments. In
this article, we detailed some of the lessons learned from a
large-scale deployment of an open loT radio access network,
where we presented the developed framework for design-
ing, implementing, testing and managing this deployment.
We highlighted the different challenges faced in the project
on both technical and management levels. Moreover, the
NMSCN project attracted two prestigious industry awards
from Municipal Association of Victoria (MAV) Technolo-
gy Awards for Excellence 2020, and loT Alliance Australia
(loTAA) Smart Cities Award for 2020.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Zanella et al,, “Internet of Things for Smart Cities,” IEEE J. Internet of Things,
vol. 1, no. 1, Feb. 2014, pp. 22-32.

[2] A. Solanas et al, “Smart Health: A Context-aware Health Paradigm within
‘Smart Cities,” IEEE Commun. Mag,, vol. 52, no. 8, 2014, pp. 74-81

[3] W. Ejaz et al,, “Efficient Energy Management for the Internet of Things in
Smart Cities,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 1, 2017, pp. 84-91

[4] Y. Mehmood et al, “Internet-of-Things-based Smart Cities: Recent Advances
and Challenges,” IEEE Commun. Mag,, vol. 55, no. 9, 2017, pp. 16-24.

[5] B. Al Homssi et al, “On the Bound of Energy Consumption in Cellular loT Net-
works,” IEEE Trans, Green Commun. and Networking, pp. 1-1, 2019.

[6] “IEEE Standard for an Architectural Framework for the Internet of Things
(loT),” IEEE Std 2413-2019, 2020, pp. 1-269.

[7] Australian Government, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet,
“Smart Cities Plan,” Australian Government, May 2016, [online]. Available:
https://www.infrastructure.gov.au/cities/smart-cities/plan/ files/Smart Cities
Plan.pdf [Accessed: May 2, 2020].

[8] Australian Government, Department of Infrastructure, Re.gional Development
and Cities, “Northern Melbourne Smart Cities Network, enabling data to drive
change,” [online]. Available: https://www. infrastructure. gov.au/cities/smart-cit-
ies/collaboration-platform/northern-melbourne-smart-citiesnetwork.aspx

[9] A. A-Hourani, “On the Probability of Line-of-Sight in Urban Environments,”
IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., 2020, pp. 1-1.

[10] B. Al Homssi et al,, “Free Spectrum for loT: How Much Can It Take?” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Work-
shops), May 2018, pp. 1-6.

[11] B. A. Homssi et al, “Machine Learning Framework for Sensing and Modeling
Interference in loT Frequency Bands,” in IEEE J. Internet of Things.

[12] A. AFHourani, “Interference Modeling in Low-altitude Unmanned Aerial Vehi-
cles,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., 2020.

[13] R. J. Rossi, Mathematical Statistics : An Introduction to Likelihood Based Infer-
ence. Newark: John Wiley & Sons, 2018.

BIOGRAPHIES
Basset. AL HOMsst is currently working toward his Ph.D. degree in the School of
Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia. His research interests are
focused on wireless sensor networks, the Internet of Things, and the practical
deployment of large-scale IoT networks.

‘AKRAM ALHOURANI is the lead investigator on this project at RMIT University. He
is a senior lecturer and the program manager for the Master of Engineering (Tele-
communication and Networks) at the School of Engineering, RMIT University,
Melbourne, Australia. He completed the Ph.D. degree in 2016 from RMIT U
versity. He has extensive industry/government engagement as a chief investigator
in multiple research projects related to the Internet-of-Things, smart cities, and
satellite/wireless communications.

Kaciso MAGows holds a doctoral degree in electronics and telecommunications
engineering and is currently a research fellow with the School of Engineering,
RMIT University. His research interests include communication theory, informa-
tion theory, statistical signal processing, application of linear algebra, cognitive
radios, localization, Internet of Things, and the application of machine learning,

JAwes DELANEY is currently working toward his master of engineering at the School
of Manufacturing, Materials and Mechatronics Engineering, RMIT University,
Melbourne, Australia. He received a bachelor of engineering in 2018 also from
RMIT University, specializing in electrical and electronic engineering. His current
research interests include Internet of Things, smart cities, and machine learning for
wireless communications.

Net Tom completed his master of engineering specialized in telecommunications
and networks from RMIT University in 2019. He graduated with a bachelor of
technology in 2017 specialized in electronics and communication engineering.
His current work and interests focus on the field of loT.

JOAN YING is the IT Infrastructure Project Manager at the Banyule City Council
and a project manager of the Northern Melbourne Smart Cities Network project.
With a master’s degree in information technology and over 10 industrial certiti-
cations, she has successfully delivered many projects, including cloud migrations,
network deployments, security services and unified communication solutions.

HANS WOLF holds a masters of business (information technology). He is the Chief
Information Officer at the City of Whittlesea and sponsor of the Northern Mel
bourne Smart Cities project. He has led technology teams in various public and
private sector organizations ensuring stakeholder value by leveraging technology.

SIMON MASEL! is the founder and CEO of Minnovation Australia (the industry
partner in this project). His Australian based company manufactures loT and
telemetry products that have been deployed across Australia and New Zealand,
South East Asia and Europe for dozens of global brands.

SITHAMPARANATHAN KANDEEPAN is a full professor and the Discipline Leader for
Telecommunications and Photonics, School of Engineering, RMIT University. His
areas of expertise include communication engineering, signal processing and
networks. He has extensive experience in working with the industry for bringing,
research to practice as well as conducting fundamental research.

Ke WANG is a senior lecturer and Australian Research Council (ARC) DECRA
Fellow at the School of Engineering, RMIT University. He has published more than
120 papers, including more than 20 invited papers. His research interests mainly
include optical wireless communications, underwater wireless communications,
optical interconnects, and silicon photonic integration.

KARINA MABELL GOMEZ is a network project manager at Milano Teleport, Italy. In
2015, she served as a senior lecturer at the School of Engineering at RMIT Univer-
sity, where her role was to coordinate several networking courses and supervise
several Ph.D. and master students. She obtained her Ph.D. degree in telecommu-
nications from the University of Trento, Italy.

FOOTNOTES

This work was parially funded by the Smart Cites and Suburbs Program, Deparment of Iniastucure, Transport,
Regional Development and Communications, Austalian Goverment, Under the project, Norther Melbourne
Saatt Cities Network, Enabling Data to Drive Change, grant numer SCS69259,

" hp/alphax.com.au/

IEEE Internet of Things Magazine * March 2021

59

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 06:38:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

| | HOMSSI_LAYOUT.indd 59

seare sav au | |


