 Research Project
Research Project
Criteria 	Ratings 	Pts
This criterion is linked to a learning outcome Abstract / Conclusion
The Abstract
Provide an interesting motivation for the reader to read the rest of the report !
Include a quick background/ motivation
Include a summary of the main contributions of your assignment
Include the main take-away results
Conclusion
Summary of the paper
Take away message
Future work that can be done on this topic
	
2 Pts Excellent
1.5 Pts Good
1 Pts Acceptable
0 Pts Not satisfactory
	
2 pts
This criterion is linked to a learning outcome Literature review
Literature review on the general subject
Literature review on your particular topic
(if applicable) Comparison between the literature qualitatively and/ or quantitatively
Include comparison tables when applicable
Avoid using too generic literate that is not related to the topic
	
7 Pts Excellent
5 Pts Good
3.5 Pts Acceptable
0 Pts Not satisfactory
	
7 pts
This criterion is linked to a learning outcome Results and Discussions
Observations, results or discussions should be both accurate and may show innovation. Observations should thorough and may recognize possible errors in simulation. Work should be neat and organized. Includes appropriate symbols, labels, units and significant digits, where appropriate.
Graphs / plots should be neat. Labels are added to the x-axis y-axis. properly annotated with legends, units, clear x and y axis ticks, etc..
	
8 Pts Excellent
6 Pts Good
4 Pts Acceptable
0 Pts Not satisfactory
	
8 pts
This criterion is linked to a learning outcome System Model
The assumptions should be sound and referenced
The utilized models should be well explained and references including (examples – when applicable: Channel models, fading, packet error rate, error models, etc.. )
Sufficient diagram(s) for your system – should be neatly drawn using professional tools such as Visio, Power point, etc..
Equations and derivation are well explained and free of errors
Analytic results are well derived and explained when applicable
Graphs / plots are neat. Labels are added to the x-axis y-axis.
	
8 Pts Excellent
6 Pts Good
4 Pts Acceptable
0 Pts Not satisfactory
	
8 pts
This criterion is linked to a learning outcome Simulation code
The code should have novel aspects,
Should be well annotated and clearly organized
The code need to be well explained in the system model
	
5 Pts Excellent
3.5 Pts Good
2.5 Pts Acceptable
0 Pts Not satisfactory
	
5 pts
Total points: 30