® RMIT

UNIVERSITY

EEET2370/EEET2371
Assessment Task 3: Project Assignment (30%)

Project Assignment Instructions

e Start working on this assignment as soon as possible !
Check canvas for the due date of this assignment (Research Project)
This written assignment (Research Project) worth 30% of the total mark
This assignment is individual
This assignment gives a large room for the student to be innovative and to propose their
own ideas
e Marks will be awarded as follows (details is in the rubric on Canvas)
o Depth of literature review
Figures, plots and illustrations (drawn by the student)
Clarity of writing and equations
Novelty and innovation
Sound assumptions and parameters
Simulation code
Proper references
¢ The assignment should be written in LaTeX format using IEEE Conference Template. It is
suggested to use the online Overleaf editor on: https://www.overleaf.com/project. Feel free
to use any other LaTeX editor (online or offline).
e Use IEEE citation style
e It is expected to have a document of 4-6 pages long - double column format (3000-4500
words) — excluding the code which should be submitted separately
e The student is expected to develop a code to simulate/analyze the selected concept, the code
needs to be neatly written with clear annotation (comments). Also, it needs to be
consistent with the assignment text and well explained.
o The code needs to be (written in ASCII format) with sufficient annotation to allow
the examiner to understand the code.
o Coding/scripting language needs to be either in Matlab (or Simulink), Python, or
C/C++
o It is indeed allowed to use libraries and functions (both built-in and external),
however it should be clearly identified in the code which part was developed by the
student and which part was taken from other sources.
o The code contribution of the student should be significant and not just adjusting
available online codes
e State your assumptions inside the assignment document! Marks are awarded to sound
assumptions
¢ Important note about plagiarism:
o You should write the assignment yourself. Under no circumstances any 1

oo0o0o000

part of this assignment can be written by anyone else (unless otherwise
some quoted text is clearly stated and referenced)

o Plagiarism will not be tolerated and heavy loss of marks (or zero mark) will be
incurred with possible wider academic penalties.

o. The rules apply similarly to the developed codes

EEET2370/EEET2371 Research Project. Dr A. Al-Hourani, RMIT University Page 1 of 5
® RMIT

UNIVERSITY

Report structure
Following is the recommended report structure,

e Abstract (min 150 words)
o. Provide an interesting motivation for the reader to read the rest of the report !
o Include a quick background/ motivation
o Include a summary of the main contributions of your assignment
co. Include the main take-away results
e Introduction and Background (min 400 words)
o Background on your topic
o Motivation for studying your topic
o Main contribution of your work (dot points) and how it is different from the
literature (novelty)
e Literature review (min 1000 words)
o. Literature review on the general subject
o Literature review on your particular topic
o. (if applicable) Comparison between the literature qualitatively and/ or quantitatively
o Include comparison tables when applicable
e System model*
o. Feel free to call this section something else (for example network model, simulator
model, ... ) or to split this section into multiple sections / subsections
o Also feel free to take some of these points to the next section when needed
o Main assumptions for your work
o Utilized models (examples — when applicable: Channel models, fading, packet error
rate, error models, etc.. )
o Include explanation / justification on why did you pick up this model / modelling
approach
A diagram for your system (or diagrams) — neatly drawn using professional tools
such as Visio, Power point, etc..
Equations and derivation
Analytic results when applicable
Add graphs, plots
o Explain your code / algorithms
e Results and performance*
o. Feel free to call this section something else or to split it into multiple sections /
subsections
o Simulation numerical inputs and parameters (why did you pick up these parameters,
add references)
o Figures graphs of your results, properly annotated with legends, units, clear x and y
axis ticks, etc..
o (bonus) to compare your results with existing literature
¢ Conclusion (min 150 words)
o Summary of the paper
o Take away message
o Future work that can be done on this topic

fe}

oo°o

*System Model and Results sections both minimum 1300 words

EEET2370/EEET2371 Research Project. Dr A. Al-Hourani, RMIT University Page 2 of 5
® RMIT

UNIVERSITY

Topics
Below are the topics that will be allocated to students,

Topic 1 Radio coverage designs for LPWAN access network (undergraduates)

The objective is to design radio coverage (downlink) for a NB-IoT access network to cover
Melbourne metropolitan area. The project will use existing cellular tower locations as provided on
Canvas (“TowersLocations.csv”, assume the tower height as 30 m). The main outcomes of the
project are:

Hints:

The project will provide literature review for (but not limited to):
o Brief overview of NB-IoT standard
o NB-IoT coverage and performance
o NB-IoT limitations
o State-of-the-art coverage design approaches for NB-IoT (or in Cellular coverage in
general)
Map(s) showing the locations of the import sites locations
Graph(s) for the Block error rate (BLER) vs. SNR (for two repetition rates | and 32)
Graph (s) for the radio coverage of NB-IoT (in terms of the received signal strength — dBm)
Graph (s) for the radio coverage of NB-IoT (in terms of the signal to noise ratio)
Two plots for coverage contour for two different repetition rates 1 and 32. Take 5% BLER
as the threshold
Additional figures and results as needed

In order to get more realistic coverage, assume an average background interference power =
-85 dBm and use this as
equivalent to noise, i.e.
Effective noise power =
N_thermal + average
interference power. Make
sure to have __ this
summation in linear 37°44'S
You could make use of
Matlab NB-IoT package to It X i
extract the block error rate . Sa fey ere 2 Ran
(BLER) vs. SNR and utilize 37°46'S eo! : -

37°42'S

Latitude

this for mapping the SNR : a wa

into coverage. See this ‘ a ‘

tutorial. :

You could make use of  37°48S fae.

Matlab “RF Propagation” 77a ET ae
. 144°55'E 145°E 145°05'E

toolbox. See this example. Longitude

You could make use of

geoplot function in Matlab to Figure 1 Tower locations on Canvas, file name:

show the location of the towers "TowersLocations.csv"

See 3GPP recommendations for

NB-IoT design parameters (noise floor

Use transmit power of 40 watts with 3 directional antennas (120° spaced) at each site (each
having gain of 12 dBi) — You could use the antenna pattern uploaded in Canvas
‘Directional 12dBi.mat’, or create your own antenna pattern.

Use frequency 900 MHz for the simulation

EEET2370/EEET2371 Research Project. Dr A. Al-Hourani, RMIT University Page 3 of 5
® RMIT

UNIVERSITY

Use Longley-Rice model as your radio propagation model

Recommended reading on a similar practical project in Victoria conducted by RMIT University
team and 5 Victorian councils.

If something is not stated in the question use your own assumptions and explain the reason for
such selection.

EEET2370/EEET2371 Research Project. Dr A. Al-Hourani, RMIT University Page 4 of 5

® RMIT

UNIVERSITY

## IMPORTANT ##
If something is not stated in the question use your own assumptions and explain the reason for such selection

EEET2370/EEET2371 Research Project. Dr A. Al-Hourani, RMIT University Page 5 of 5
