===== The_3GPP_NB-IoT_system_architecture_for_the_Internet_of_Things-1..txt =====
1CC2017: WS06-Convergent Internet of Things- On the synergy of loT systems

The 3GPP NB-IoT system architecture for the
Internet of Things

Almudena Diaz Zayas* and Pedro Merino*
*University of Malaga, Andalucia Tech, Malaga, Spain, 29071
Email: almudiaz@Icc.uma.es, pedro @Icc.uma.es

Abstract—The first version of the 3GPP NarrowBand-IoT (NB-
IoT) standards has been finalized in June 2016 as part of Release
13. NB-IoT is a promising new radio access technology which can
coexist with existing GSM, UMTS and LTE deployments. In fact,
NB-IoT specifications have been integrated into LTE standards.
NB-IoT goes a step further than the MTC [3] (Machine Type
Communication) specification, focusing on extremely low cost
devices, massive deployments and reduced data rates with a
carrier bandwidth of just 200 kHz (hence its name). In this paper
we will take a close look at 3GPP specifications to discover which
are the modifications required in traditional LTE deployments to
provide connectivity to the upcoming Cat-NB1 User Equipments
(UEs).

I. INTRODUCTION

As result of the 3GPP study item TR 45.820 [1] titled
"Cellular system support for ultra-low complexity and low
throughput Internet of Things (CIoT)” a new narrowband
radio technology have been proposed, called NB-IoT. NB-
IoT is being integrated in the LTE standards and a new
UE category has been standardized in [2], Cat-NB1. Features
provided by NB-IoT have been previously introduced in [(4][5]
and are oriented to cover the low-end massive Machine Type
Communication (MTC) scenario: extended coverage, support
of massive number of low throughput devices, high allowed
latency, ultra-low device cost, low device power consumption
and optimized network architecture. As shown in Table I the
requirements of NB-IoT are the same as for eMTC (enhanced
MTC)[3], but with focus on the low-end massive MTC sce-
narios. NB-IoT provides even lower cost in UEs than eMTC
and a higher extended coverage of 164 dB MCL (at least for
standalone deployment). The battery life is also around 10
years with 5 Watt Hour battery. NB-IoT is compatible with
the enhanced DRX mode introduced in Release 13 to reduce
power consumption. The number of devices supported per cell
is around 55.000.

Unlike eMTC, that can only be deployed in-band, utilizing
resource blocks within a normal LTE carrier, NB-IoT can
also be deployed in the unused resource blocks within a
LTE carrier’s guard-band, or standalone for deployments in
dedicated spectrum. NB-IoT is also particularly suitable for
the re-farming of GSM channels.

An early proof of concept has been carried out by Aalto
University and Ericcson Research in Finland. This initial tests
were run in standalone mode and based on a Cloud RAN
(C-RAN) architecture. The NB-IoT ability to support high

latencies make it an appropriate use case for applying a
deployment based on C-RAN.

In this paper we describe the evolution of 3GPP standards
related with MTC/NB-IoT and detail the changes introduced
into LTE standards to provide support to NB-IoT, the latest
3GPP standard for IoT. The paper is organized as follows.
In section II we provide the necessary background on 3GPP
MTC/oT standards to understand the role of NB-IoT in the
ToT era. Section III describes the modifications introduced
in the radio access network. The architectural transformation
suffered in the EPC is explained in section IV. Finally, in
section 5, we provide an additional comparison between MTC
and NB-IoT, and introduce the future enhancements expected
in Release 14.

Il. BACKGROUD

3GPP (Third Generation Partnership Project) is the stan-
dardization body that specifies LTE/LTE-Advanced, as well
as 3G UTRA and 2G GSM mobile communications systems.
3GPP standards are structured as Releases. The definition of
the mobile technology known as Long Term Evolution (LTE)
was initiated in 2005 and the first 3GPP specifications were
introduced in Release 8 by in December 2007.

The term “user equipment” (UE) has been traditionally used
by 3GPP to refer to the cellular equipment utilized by the
subscriber to access network services. The UE can be a smart-
phone or an embedded device contained in a M2M equipment.
To support multiple UE hardware capabilities 3GPP defines
different categories in 3GPP 36.306. The categories differ in
the maximum data rates supported in the downlink and in the
uplink, which are associated, for example, with the support
of spatial multiplexing (MIMO transmission). The categories
are also used by the eNodeB (LTE base station) to establish
the conditions under which the communication with the UE
will take place. As discussed below, the UE category is an
important concept in IoT. Table II provides a summary of the
UE categories oriented to MTC/IoT scenarios.

The initial version of the LTE Machine Type Communic:
tion (MTC) standards was introduced in Release 8 and was
based on Category 1. Category 1 was the lowest capability
with maximum bit rates of 10 Mbps downlink and 5 Mbps
uplink while Category 5, the highest category in Release 8,
supported data rates of 300 Mbps in downlink and 75 in
Mbps in uplink. Although Category 1 UEs do not support
MIMO transmission, they still have 2 receiver antennas and

o7Buth5386."'985885 ype Araiiod doe UAT YWersity Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:31:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== The_3GPP_NB-IoT_system_architecture_for_the_Internet_of_Things-2..txt =====
1CC2017: WS06-Convergent Internet of Things- On the synergy of loT systems

[ [_eMTC Enhanced MTC) Release 13_|

NB-IoT (Release 13)

Coverage Enhancement

15 dB gain better compared to GPRS

20 dB gain compared to GPRS

Reduced complexity

Similar to EGPRS modem cost

Ultra-low cost CIS)

Power efficiency 10 year battery life

10 year battery life

Latency TO sec 10 sec
Capacity ~10000 devices per cell ~50000 decives per cell
Coexistence LTE in-band GSM standalone, LTE in-band, CTE guard-band
TABLET
EMTC vs NB-IOT FEATURES
Huawei
Vodafone

Qualcomm

Release

NB-loT

3GPP 13
Work Item NB-loT
Release 13

Frozen

Ericsson

/-

J
T
g
&
c
I

J |
b z
iy S
x Nv
Ss ro
$ $

Fig. 1. NB-IoT standardization process

have to support all RF channel bandwidth options from 1.4 to
20 MHz and other functionalities that increase the hardware
complexity. Moreover this category does not meet the battery,
cost and range requirements of IoT. The first release of MTC
was focused on the optimization of charging mechanisms,
addressing, fixed location, low mobility and low activity
terminals, handling of large numbers of subscriptions and
subscriber data within the network, handling issues of large
number of M2M subscriptions for the user of M2M services
and security aspects.

A new UE category 0 was introduced in Release 12, which
achieves cost reduction of about 50% compared to Category 1.
Also a new power saving mode was introduced in this Release
in 3GPP TS 24.301 and 23.682. The main purpose of this new
feature is to reduce energy consumption while the device is
not transmitting or receiving. Other solutions for MTC were
discussed in Release 12 as part of 3GPP 36.888. Improvements
such as half-duplex transmission, single RF chain and reduced
peak throughput are part of the specification of MTC UE Cat 0.

Cost reduction using reduced system bandwidth and coverage
improvements specification were postponed to Released 13.
Continuing the normative work started in Release 12 to
enhance the LTE suitability for the promising loT market, the
key focus of eMTC (often referred to as LTE-M) for Release
13 is to define a new low complexity UE category type that
supports reduced bandwidth, reduced transmit power, reduced
support for downlink transmission modes, ultra-long battery
life via power consumption reduction techniques and extended
coverage operation. This is Cat-M1 (previously known as Cat-
M). In Release 13 MTC achieves an additional 50% cost
reduction through the restriction in system bandwidth to 1.4
MHz, which has a heavy impact on the design of the receiver,
reducing the complexity of the baseband processing. This
Release also introduces coverage enhancements to achieve
an improvement of 15 dB, allowing operators to reach MTC
devices in poor coverage conditions such as meters located in
basements. These two improvements have an important impact
on the design of the logical and the physical channels that

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:31:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== The_3GPP_NB-IoT_system_architecture_for_the_Internet_of_Things-3..txt =====
1CC2017: WS06-Convergent Internet of Things- On the synergy of loT systems

[ [ Release-8 [ Release-12 [ Release-13 [ Release-13
Cat. 1 Cat. 0 Cat. MI Cat. NBI

Donwlink peak TO Mbps T Mbps T Mbps 200 Kbps

Uplink peak rate 3 Mbps T Mbps T Mbps 144 Kbps

Number of antennas 2 T T T

Duplex mode Fall duplex Half duplex Half duplex Half duplex

UE receive bandwidth 20 MHz. 20 Mhz 1.4 MHz 200 KHz

UE transmit power 23 dBm 23 dBm 20 dBm 23 dBm

Complexity 100 % 30% 20% 13%

Use case Voice Services | Cat is the interim solu- | Environment monitoring, | Smart metering,
for emergency in | tion prior Cat-M. Cat 0 is | Vehicle tracking smart buildings, home
elevators Smart used for replacing Catl, automation
Grid Management, | but cannot replace voice
Kids/Elderly/Pet tracking | _use cases

‘Availability ‘Available Available 2017 2017

TABLE TT

EVOLUTION OF UE CATEGORIES FOR MTC/IOT

have to support low bandwidth modes and enhanced coverage.
Another key enhancement in Release 13 is the introduction of
extended DRX [6], which is based on the usage of longer DRX
(Discontinuous Reception) timers to achieve further power
consumption improvements. The DRX concept consists in the
monitoring of downlink signalling channel during a limited
period of time. During the remaining time the device gets
slept in order to reduce power consumption.

In May 2014, Huawei and Vodafone proposed a study
item of NB-M2M to 3GPP GERAN which quickly garnered
strong support and increased attention from other leading
operators. In October of the same year Qualcomm submitted
a new narrowband IoT proposal called NB-OFDM. In May
2015, both technologies merged into NB-CloT (NarrowBand
Cellular IoT).

Meanwhile Ericcson accelerated their research on narrow-
band IoT and proposed NB-LTE (Narrowband LTE) in August
2015.

In September 2015, the 3GPP accepted the inclusion of
both technologies as a Work Item in Release 13 [1]. NB-
CloT is a clean slate approach promoted by Huawei. The
main difference between NB-LTE and NB-CloT comes down
to how much of existing LTE networks can be reused for
IoT. NB-CIoT requires new chipsets and does not seem to
be backwards compatible with any LTE network older than
Release 13. NB-LTE, by contrast, can be fully integrated
into existing LTE networks, works within current LTE bands
and does not need an overlay network. In November 2015
3GPP agreed these two initiative evolve into only one standard
called Narrowband IoT (NB-IoT). NB-IoT specifies a new
radio access for cellular IoT, based to a great extent on a
non-backward-compatible variant of E-UTRA, that addresses
improved indoor coverage, support for massive number of
low throughput devices, low delay sensitivity, ultra low device
cost, low device power consumption and (optimised) network
architecture. So, NB-IoT has become the main steam for 3GPP
LPWAN (Low Power Wide Area Network) replacing NB-LTE
and NB-CIoT (Cellular IoT) proposals. On June 2016 3GPP
completed the standardization of NB-IoT, the new narrowband
radio technology developed for the internet-of-Things (IoT).

NB-IoT UEs are referred to as Cat-NB1 (also known as Cat-
M2). The reduction of their complexity, compared with Cat.
1, is up to 90%. 3GPP completed the standardization of NB-
IoT on June 2016, it took only 9 months to standardize this
new technology after the study phase, which demonstrates the
importance of IoT for 3GPP.

The work carried out in GSM/EDGE group inside 3GPP
on Extended Coverage GSM for IoT (EC-GSM-IoT) has been
integrated into these two projects: LTE-M and NB-IoT.

In parallel with these standardization processes carried out
inside 3GPP, there are other initiatives which operate in an
unlicensed spectrum basis. It is the case of LORaWAN, Sigfox
and OnRamp wireless, Weightless -N & -P etc. Most of these
networks take advantage of industrial, scientific, and medical
ISM _ unlicensed frequency bands. These technologies are
currently available, have already been deployed and meet the 4
factors for LPWAN (long range, very low power, low data rate,
and very low cost). Some are based on protocols supported
by industry alliances like LoRaWAN Alliance and Weightless
SIG, some are based on proprietary protocols and some are
standards in-progress.

Il. NB-IoOT RADIO ACCESS NETWORK

NB-IoT provides access to network services using a physical
layer[8] optimized for very low power consumption and low
cost. The full carrier bandwidth is 180 kHz, the subcarrier
spacing can be 3.75 kHz (only for the uplink) or 15 kHz, the
highest modulation scheme is QPSK, there is only support
for FDD and half-duplex operation. The downlink of NB-
IoT is based on OFDMA and the transmission scheme uses
only one physical resource block (PRB). The uplink is based
on single-carrier FDMA. For uplink transmission, there are
two possible operation modes, single-tone transmission and
multi-tone transmission. In single tone either 3.75 kHz or
15 kHz subcarrier spacing is allowed. In multi-tone only 15
kHz subcarrier spacing can be used. Multi-tone transmission
enables grouping sets of 3, 6 or 12 subcarriers. Additionally,
the minimum duration for the resource units used in scheduling
depends on the number of assigned subcarriers and the oper-

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:31:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== The_3GPP_NB-IoT_system_architecture_for_the_Internet_of_Things-4..txt =====
1CC2017: WS06-Convergent Internet of Things- On the synergy of loT systems

ation mode, ranging from 1 ms in 12 sub-carriers multitone
transmission to 32ms in 3.75 kHz single tone transmission.

A number of E-UTRA (Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio
Access) protocol functions supported by all Rel-8 UEs are not
used for NB-IoT UEs: inter-RAT mobility, handover, measure-
ment reports, public warning functions, GBR, CSG, support
of HeNBs, relaying, carrier aggregation, dual connectivity,
NAICS, MBMS, real-time services, interference avoidance
for in-device coexistence, RAN assisted WLAN interworking,
sidelink communication/discovery, MDT, emergency call and
CS fallback.

For NB-IoT the positioning may be supported based on
the existing LCS (Location Services) architecture with eNB
measurements only.

Five new physical channels are introduced:

« Narrowband Physical Broadcast
« Narrowband Physical Downlink Shared Channel
(NPDSCH). Carries the DL-SCH (Downlink Shared
Channel) and PCH (Paging Channel) for NB-IoT UEs.
« Narrowband Physical Downlink Control Channel (NPD-
CCH). Informs the NB-IoT UE about the resource al-
location of PCH and DL-SCH and carries the uplink
scheduling grant for the NB-IoT UE.
« Narrowband Physical Uplink Shared Channel
(NPUSCH). Carries the UL-SCH (Uplink Shared
Channel) and Hybrid ARQ ACK/NACKs in response to
downlink transmission for the NB-IoT UE.
Narrowband Physical Random Access
(NPRACH). Carries random access
for the NB-IoT UE.

Channel
preamble

the

Regarding MAC (Medium Access Control) layer, NB-IoT
introduces a number of changes to reduce power consumption
and make scheduling more flexible and simple. Because of
the lower throughput requirements, a single HARQ process
is used. This allows removing the HARQ identifier from
the scheduling a nments and thus use a lower number of
control bits for higher efficiency and robustness. Additionally,
uplink retransmissions are no longer synchronous but always
adaptive and asynchronous both in UL and DL. This provides
the network with tighter control on the UL scheduling while
preventing undesired periodic retransmissions as they will be
now generated only when explicitly requested.

Other NB-IoT L2 and L3 enhancements include the reduc-
tion of the maximum PDCP SDU and Control PDU sizes,
from 8188 octets to 1600 bytes. This is a reasonable tradeoff
as traditional internet traffic does not exceed 1500 bytes per
IP packet.

While in connected mode, DRX can be configured with
cycles up to 10.24 seconds. Regarding Paging configuration,
when DRX is enabled in idle mode, for NB-IoT, the maximum
value of the DRX cycle is 10485.76 seconds (2.91 hours).
This allows for very high power saving when the use case
is compatible with accordingly high connection establishment
latencies.

IV. NB-IOT SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

NB-IoT architecture simplifies the existing EPC (Evolved
Packet Core) architecture in order to address the IoT require-
ments of traffic models identified in [1] and shown in Table III.
s small data transmission on a simplified architecture
that is oriented to transporting these small data over NAS (Non
Access Stratus) signalling messages. A dedicated core network
node for CIoT (Internet of Things using 3GPP technology)
profile provides combined C-plane and U-plane functions, e.g.
aggregating some of the functions that traditionally reside
in MME (Mobility Management Entity) and SGW (Serving
Gateway, and in some instance PGW (Packet Data Network
Gateway) in a new logical entity called C-SGN (CIoT Serving
Gateway Node). C-SGN can be implemented to support only
the necessary functionality required for CIoT use cases. S1-lite
is an optimized version of S1-C (the S1 control plane which
is based on the S1AP protocol) interface between the eNodeB
and the MME. From S1-C only the necessary S1AP messages
are supported (and inside the messages only the required parts)
for the related CloT procedures and the optimised security
procedures are supported, as well as some functionality to
support data transport. The user plane data is carried in these
modified S1AP messages in order to support efficient small
data handing. The data planes tunnels of the SI-U interface
(defined in TS 23.401 [9]) are not required.

This architecture supports certain modifications (e.g. native
support of SMS in PS domain, attach without PDN connection,
simplified NAS etc.) to be applicable only to CloT UEs with-
out requiring procedures to maintain backwards compatibility
with other UEs.

In NB-IoT, for signalling optimization, two solutions are
introduced in addition to legacy RRC (Radio Resource Con-
trol) connection setup. The first solution, Data-over-NAS
(DONAS), is mandatory and is a control plane optimiza-
tion based on solution 2 proposed in [7]. DONAS enables
transmitting data without having to activate an user plane,
implementing only this option allows UE implementations
with fewer requirements related to the user plane, such as the
support for Unacknowledged Mode (UM) in RLC, multiple
dedicated logical channels, DTCH, RLC re-establisdhment,
DTC . The second solution is an user plane optimization
called RRC Suspend/Resume. This mode is optional and is
based on solution 18 specified in [7]). RRC Suspend/Resume
introduces enhancements to disable and restore the user plane
in an efficient way. In the control plane optimization the data
is sent over Non Access Stratum (NAS), directly from the
Mobility Management Entity (MME) in the core network to
the UE without interaction from the base station.

The RRC Suspend/Resume procedures reduce the signalling
overhead and also improve UE battery lifetime. The protocol
architecture of NB-IoT and LTE is separated into control
plane and user plane. Control plane consists of protocols
which control the radio access bearers and the connection
between the UE and the network. The highest layer of control
plane is called Non-Access Stratum (NAS), which conveys

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:31:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== The_3GPP_NB-IoT_system_architecture_for_the_Internet_of_Things-5..txt =====
1CC2017: WS06-Convergent Internet of Things- On the synergy of loT systems

g

S1- lite

UE S1-MME

S1-MME (NAS (encrypted
Small Data ))

bj ey

PtP IP tunnel for nonIP data

eacicit

Application
Service

SMSC/
IWMSC

Fig. 2. LTE Architecture for NB-loT

[Category [ Application example [UL Data Size [DE Data Size [Frequency ]
Mobile Autonomous Re- ] smoke alarm detectors, | 20 bytes ‘0 ACK payload size is as- | Every few months, Every
porting (MAR) exception | power failure notifications sumed to be 0 bytes year

ger to send uplink report,
request for meter reading

reports from smart meters, tamper
notifications ete.
Mobile Autonomous Re- | smart utility | 20 bytes with a cut off | 50% of UL data size ACK | 1 day (40%), 2 hours
porting (MAR) periodic | (gas/water/electric) of 200 bytes ie. payloads | payload size is assumed to | (40%), 1 hour (15%), and
reports metering reports, | higher than 200 bytes are | be 0 bytes 30 minutes (5%)
smart agriculture, smart | assumed to be 200 bytes.
environment etc.
Network Command ‘Switch on/off, device trig- | 0 - 20 bytes 50% of cases | 20 bytes T day (40%), 2 hours

require UL response.

(40%), 1 hour (15%), and
30 minutes (5%)

Software
date/reconfiguration
model

up- | Software patches/updates

assumed to be

200 bytes with a cut off
of 2000 bytes i.e. payload
higher than 2000 bytes are

200 bytes with a cut off
of 2000 bytes i.e. payload
higher than 2000 bytes are
assumed to be 2000 bytes.

T80 days

2000 bytes.

TABLE IIT
TRAFFIC MODELS FOR CELLULAR IOT [3GPP TR 45.820(1]]

the radio signalling between the UE and the EPC, passing
transparently through the radio network. It is responsible
for authentication, security control, mobility management and
bearer management. Access Stratum (AS) is the functional
layer below NAS, and in control plane it consists of Radio
Resource Control protocol (RRC). RRC configures the user
and control planes according to the network status. There are
two main RRC states, RRC_Idle or RRC_Connected, and the
RRC entity controls the switching between these states. In
RRC_Idle, the network knows that the UE is present in the
network and the UE can be reached in case of incoming call. In
RRC_Connected the UE has a connection to the eNodeB, the
network knows the UE location on cell level and the UE may
receive and transmit data. Connection is released, switching to
RRC_Idle, when there is no traffic to save the UE battery and
radio resources. RRC Suspend/Resume procedures reduce the

signalling overhead required for UE state transition from Idle
to Connected mode in order to have a user plane transaction
with the network and back to Idle state by reducing the
signalling messages required compared to legacy operation.
In order to support RRC Suspend/Resume procedures
MME, eNodeB and UE have to include new functionalities.
The MME, which is responsible for handling the mobility of
the UE, has to support the new procedures on S1AP, in partic-
ular the SLAP procedure triggered by the "RRC Suspend” and
"RRC Resume” procedures on the radio interface. The MME
has also to store the UE Context information when the RRC
connection is suspended and the $1 AP association is kept. The
eNodeB should include support for storing the UE context as
well as the SIAP association related parameters when the UE
is in the new CloT RRC-Idle state. Moreover, the eNodeB
has to support the new procedures to suspend/resume the

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:31:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== The_3GPP_NB-IoT_system_architecture_for_the_Internet_of_Things-6..txt =====
1CC2017: WS06-Convergent Internet of Things- On the synergy of loT systems

IP/non IP Non-IP/IP
S-NAS s-nas | GTP-C/U

RAN

UDP
RAN SAP S1AP

RAN RAN | SCTP/IP SCTPIIP | IP

RAN RAN 2 2 LW

u ul u i u ul

Stite sci
UE CIoT/LTE-RAN C-SGN

Fig. 3. Protocol stack for NB-IoT

connection. These procedures will be implemented between
the eNB and the UE as well as between the eNB and the MME.
Finally the UE has to store relevant AS information when the
UE enters into the CloT RRC_Idle and support the procedures
needed to suspend and resume the RRC connection.

Data-over-NAS is considered as the basis for the normative
work for support of infrequent small data transmission (for IP
data, non-IP data and SMS). Support of DONAS is mandatory
for both the UE and the network. This solution provides
efficient support of infrequent small data transmission for
ToT and support for non-IP data. The solution is based on
lightweight core network architecture depicted in Figure 2.
This solution piggybacks uplink small data onto the initial
NAS uplink message that is extended and it uses an additional
NAS message for carrying downlink response small data.
The efforts for setting up the user plane, i.e. related RRC
messages and AS security setup, can be avoided. There is
not establishment of DRBs and S1-U bearers. Data can also
be delivered through the SCEF (Service Capability Exposure
Function), which is used for the delivery of non-IP data
over control plane. SCEF element is part of the Architecture
Enhancements for Service Capability Exposure (AESE) [10]
introduced in Release 13, which displays network services to
3rd parties. The implementation of this solution also implies
modifications of the procedures available at the UE, eNodeB
and C-SGN/MME to support e.g. handling of “NAS small
data” sessions and the attach without bearer activation.

The resulting protocol stack after the adoption of these two
solutions is the simplified protocol stack shown in Figure 3
where S-NAS indicates a simplified NAS signalling.

V. CONCLUSION

While LTE-M is a pure LTE technology NB-IoT is a new
radio technology that coexists with existing GSM, UMTS and
LTE systems.

In regard to the uses cases of both technologies the main dif-
ferences are mobility and throughput. NB-IoT offers reduced
data rate and reduced mobility support compared to LTE-M
as shown in Table IT

In Release 14, we can expect further enhancements for NB-
IoT in the form of multicast support, latency reduction opti-
mizations to enable vehicle to vehicle (V2V) communications,
positioning, mobility and service continuity enhancements,
non-anchor PRB enhancements and new power classes and

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work has been funded by the Spanish Ministry of Econ-
omy and Competitiveness (TIN2015-67083-R), FEDER and
the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No 688712).

REFERENCES

[1] 3GPP TR 45.820 Cellular system support for ultra-low complexity and
low throughput Internet of Things (CloT)

[2] 3GPP TS 36.101 Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA);

User Equipment (UE) radio transmission and reception

3GPP 36.888, Study on provision of low-cost Machine-Type Communi-

cations (MTC) UEs based on LTE

[4] J. Gozalvez, “New 3GPP Standard for lot [Mobile Radio,” in IEEE
Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 14-20, March 2016.

[5] S. Landstrm, J. Bergstrm, E. Westerberg, D. Hammarwall, "NB-IoT: A
sustainable technology for connecting billions of devices”, in Ericsson
Technology Review, vol. 93, no. 3, pp. 2-11, April 2016

[6] 3GPP TR 23.770, Study on System Impacts of Extended DRX Cycle for
Power Consumption Optimization

[7] 3GPP TR 23.720 Study on architecture enhancements for Cellular Internet
of Things

[8] 3GPP TS 36.300 LTE; Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-
UTRA) and Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radico Access Network (E-
UTRAN); Overall description; Stage 2

.401 General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) enhancements for
Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN) access

[10] 3GPP TR 23.708 Architecture Enhancements for Service Capability
Exposure (AESE)

(3

[9]

Authorized licensed use limited to: RMIT University Library. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 23:31:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

